<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>From the sun’s might, away may the calm planet rove?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How easy, then, for man to wander from God’s love!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet from each circle’s point to the centre lies a track;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there’s a way to God from furthest error back.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Ruckert.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“Harry, I promised to give you these as soon as you were well enough. Perhaps you will feel able to look them over to-day,” said Mabel, and she put a little bundle of papers into her brother’s hand and hastily left the room.</p>
			<p>The young man, pale and thin from the effects of his recent illness, but so far recovered as to be seated in an arm-chair at a table from which he had been breakfasting, unfolded the papers one by one, examined their contents, and, with an air of mingled thoughtfulness and shame, spread them out before him. They were bills of various amounts, including many contracted under circumstances of which he had no recollection, and nearly all of a nature calculated to make a sober man blush at his own folly and extravagance; long accounts at a neighboring hotel for dinners and suppers shared by unworthy and ungrateful associates, petty debts contracted at most of the places of resort and entertainment for a dozen miles around, heavy charges at stable-keeper’s and blacksmiths, and an alarming balance in favor of an unprincipled horse-jockey with whom he had had frequent dealings. During the hour that Mabel purposely continued absent from the room, Harry sat studying these written records of his own disgrace, anxiously calculating the extent of his creditors’ demands, and revolving with still deeper bitterness the far heavier account which lay upon his conscience.</p>
			<p>When she at length returned, he was systematically filing the bills and noting the sum of each on a slip of paper. “Mabel,” said he, looking up as she entered, “will you write a note for me to young Bloodgood? My hand is not quite steady yet, and I want to ask him to call and see me this evening, if convenient.”</p>
			<p>Mabel did as she was requested, and Charlie responded to the summons by presenting himself at an early hour. Harry, who had not yet been below stairs, received him in his own room; and so earnest and prolonged was the conversation between them, that Mabel, as she sat in the adjoining chamber, became fearful that her brother would be over-fatigued, and listened impatiently for the visitor’s departure. “Good bye, Vaughan,” he was at length heard to say, as he left the room and lingered a moment in the passage-way. “I will see you again in a day or two. There will be no trouble in disposing of the greys. I know of one or two persons who would take them and the phaeton off your hands at any moment. Mad Sallie will bring a better price perhaps in the city, but don’t give yourself any uneasiness about the business⁠—I’ll attend to it with pleasure. I am glad to find you so much better.”</p>
			<p>Later in the evening, when Mabel was sitting beside her brother and there had been a short silence between them, Harry exclaimed in a tone of deep and mournful feeling,</p>
			<p>“Mabel, do you believe in such a thing as repentance?”</p>
			<p>“O Harry,” she promptly replied, “what hope would there be for any of us, if we were cut off from that blessed refuge?”</p>
			<p>“But I do not mean any common sorrow for a common fault;⁠—do you believe in a repentance broad and deep enough to cover such a record of folly as that?”⁠—and he pointed to the roll of bills⁠—“or to wipe out such a sense of shame and sin as is written here?” and he placed his hand upon his heart.</p>
			<p>“Do not doubt it for a moment, dear Harry,” replied Mabel, in a tone of affectionate encouragement. “The sin which we have learned to hate is robbed of half its power, and the soul is never so strong as when it realizes its own weakness.</p>
			<p>“But the sting of memory!” exclaimed Harry with bitterness; “the burning sting! Can that ever be rooted out?”</p>
			<p>“It may become the spur to a higher virtue than we ever dreamed of before. O Harry!” she continued, her voice half choked with sobs and her face hid upon his shoulder, “I know, for I have felt it. Nothing has ever so fortified me against my own weak and selfish indulgence, as the remorse and penitence with which I now look back upon a wasted, misspent, and dissipated winter.”</p>
			<p>“You!” responded Harry, fondly caressing her, for she was striving in vain to repress her tears; “dear child! What do you know of misspent and dissipated time? You shame me more than ever, when you try to lighten my load by pretending to share it.”</p>
			<p>“It is no pretence, Harry. I can never forgive myself for being so faithless to a plain and simple duty. We had such a beautiful home, and might all have been so happy together! I might have done so much to make it pleasant for you and my father and aunt! But your prophecy of me was true⁠—I was the first to yield to temptation, and to become the slave of my own vanity and self-love. Yes, it is in vain to deny it⁠—I was not the daughter and sister that I should have been.”</p>
			<p>“You have been a faithful sister to me, Mabel,” said Harry. “If you had a fault in the world, it was because your nature was so open to impressions that, like your poor brother, you were easily led captive; but you women have a deeper insight than we into the depths of human character, and so you can stop short where we must fall, unless some gentle hand follows and upholds us.” What a confiding look he gave her while he spoke the last words⁠—proving by it how fully he realized that she was the staff on which he leaned.</p>
			<p>She made no reply, and he went on. “There was a time when I thought that the same plausible, treacherous mind that had brought me to the verge of ruin and there left me to stand or fall as I best might, was striving with all his powers to establish an influence over you. I thought you cherished his opinions, trusted his false professions, and would sacrifice every other friend for one whom all must acknowledge to be the most insinuating of men. I knew my interference would fail to open your eyes, for he was the chosen companion of my better days, and it was I who had filled your ears with his praises. The self-willed, ruined dog (for so I once heard him call me) could not hope to establish his testimony against the accomplished, spotless Dudley. But instinct taught you, I believe, to repel the hypocrite, and something better than instinct bids you cling to the poor dog, who is at least sincere when he tells you how much he loves you.”</p>
			<p>Mabel clung to him the closer, but was silent.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” continued he, with forced and bitter composure, “I have no right to blame any one but myself for my fall; but if there is one man more than another who is in any degree responsible for it, it is Lincoln Dudley. It was he whose elegant taste for play first led me to the gaming-table; whose systematic self-indulgence fostered in me the love of wine; whose professed idleness robbed me of all impulse to exertion, and whose sceptical principles made me question the very existence of virtue. He would leave the gaming-house with moderate winnings, while I had staked and lost every thing; he would coolly drain the bottle, one glass from which had set my hot blood to boiling; and when at last, in some unguarded moment, I had betrayed my weakness, this polished favorite of society was the first to point at me the finger of scorn, and drive me to desperation by his contemptuous neglect. I deserved contempt, but not from him. Nor was it the least of my torments that, while turning his back upon me, he dared offer his unworthy homage to the person I loved best in the world. Thank Heaven, Mabel, you had the discernment and the strength of mind which are needed to understand and cope with such a man.”</p>
			<p>“O Harry,” exclaimed Mabel, making an effort to speak, only as she felt herself called upon to disclaim this tribute of praise, “I am not the strong-minded girl you think me. I did not question his sincerity. I believed him everything that was noble and true. I would gladly believe him so still, but I cannot.”</p>
			<p>The tone of her voice betrayed her; it told of misplaced affection, disappointed trust, and weariness of spirit. Harry put his arm around her, drew her face close to his, and whispered, “You gave him up for my sake?”</p>
			<p>“I could not find it in my heart to leave you alone, Harry,” was her simple answer.</p>
			<p>“Bless your loving heart, Mabel,” responded he, kissing her tenderly; “Dudley and I are alike unworthy of it.”</p>
			<p>This conversation, serving as it did to throw new light upon the cold and artificial character of Dudley, had at the same time the effect of sensibly weakening the hold which he still had upon Mabel’s interest and imagination. Conscious as she was of his duplicity towards herself, she was still more deeply shocked as she contemplated the faithlessness of his once boasted friendship for Harry, and she henceforth began to realize that in freeing herself from the influence of this selfish and worldly-wise man, she had secured her own no less than her brother’s welfare.</p>
			<p>It was one morning towards the end of August when Harry, who had now wholly recovered, entered his aunt Ridgway’s sitting-room with a New York paper in his hand, and glancing over the items of intelligence, read them aloud for the benefit of his aunt Sabiah and Mabel, who were seated there.</p>
			<p>“Regatta next week at Cape May⁠—Disastrous fire in Canal street⁠—Splendid fancy ball at Newport,⁠—the beautiful <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy of New York one of the belles of the evening.”</p>
			<p>“More shame for her,” muttered Sabiah, in an under tone. “Where’s her husband, I wonder?”</p>
			<p>“Shocking railroad accident,” continued Harry, disregarding the interruption; “nineteen persons killed and wounded.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, dear, how common those things are becoming!” said Mabel. “Where was it, Harry?”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens!” exclaimed the latter, making no reply to the question, and turning suddenly pale.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” cried Mabel in alarm. “Did the accident happen at the West? Father”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Father is safe,” said Harry, at once relieving her fears,⁠—“but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Is killed?” gasped Mabel, with a countenance full of dread, while Sabiah laid down her work and stared at Harry with strained and horror-stricken features.</p>
			<p>Harry answered by covering his face with one hand and passing Mabel the paper, with his thumb on the following paragraph:⁠—</p>
			<p>“We regret to learn that our esteemed fellow-citizen, Alexander Leroy, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, was among the victims of this fatal catastrophe. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Vaughan, a well-known and highly respected merchant of our city, was also a passenger on board the train, and, at the moment of the accident, occupied the same seat with his son-in-law, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy; but the former providentially escaped with only a few bruises, while the latter was instantly killed.”</p>
			<p>Mabel ran her eye hastily over this account, and, as she read the partial confirmation of her fear, uttered a low cry, and handed the paper to her Aunt Sabiah. Not a word was spoken for some minutes,⁠—all seemed struck dumb by the sudden and awful nature of the shock, and solemn thoughts chased each other through the minds of each.</p>
			<p>Thanksgiving for her father’s deliverance was mingled in Mabel’s mind with horror and grief at the sudden death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy; and in spite of her sister’s cold-hearted frivolity, she shuddered as she thought of the heavy blow which awaited, if it had not already reached, her. Perhaps Harry experienced the same train of thought, for he at length broke the silence by the abrupt inquiry, “Mabel, where is Louise?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” replied Mabel; “I wish I did, so that I might go to her.”</p>
			<p>“She is not at Newport, then?”</p>
			<p>“No. She was to give up her rooms the day after the ball, and either visit the Earles at West Point, or go to Cape May with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker,⁠—it was quite undecided when she wrote last.”</p>
			<p>“You will stay here then, I suppose, until you hear from her,” said he; “but I think I had better go immediately to father.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, do, Harry,” replied Mabel eagerly; “he may be more hurt than we suppose; at all events, he will need you. Oh, how I wish we could learn the particulars, and be sure of his safety.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway at this moment entered the room, and seeing the unusual agitation which was written in every countenance exclaimed with her wonted abruptness, “Well, what’s to pay here? Sabiah, what’s given you such a long face?”</p>
			<p>Sabiah gravely communicated the intelligence to her.</p>
			<p>“Upon my word,” cried she, “brother John has had a narrow escape. And so that gad-about of a Louise is left a widow, is she? Well, I daresay she has not found it out herself yet. The blow that reaches her has got to strike her on the wing.”</p>
			<p>No one, not even Sabiah, felt disposed at this moment to echo <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway’s remark, while the roughness of her words and manner grated so painfully upon Mabel’s overcharged feelings, and she hastened to her own room to give vent to the emotions which she could no longer control.</p>
			<p>An hour or two afterwards she was joined by Harry. He had made some inquiries concerning the route which it would be advisable for him to take, in order to reach the distant scene of the accident in the shortest possible time, and had decided that it would be best to start that evening. Mabel could not but perceive, even at this agitating season, that he seemed inspired with new energy, by the sudden necessity for exerting himself in other’s behalf; nor could she help hoping, that in the breaking up of evil associations, and the escape from the scene of his recent mortification, he would gain new strength for carrying out his earnest and manly purpose of reformation.</p>
			<p>By the judicious management of young Bloodgood in the sale of Harry’s horses and their expensive equipment, a sufficient sum had been raised to defray his numerous debts. There was but little remaining, however, and he was obliged to beg assistance from Mabel’s purse, to furnish him with funds for the journey. Proud of the promptness with which he had rendered justice to his creditors, and feeling this expedition to be one in which they had a common interest, Mabel would gladly have transferred to him every cent of her ample supply of pocket money. But he would receive only what his actual expenses demanded, forcing back the rest into her hand, and saying, “You forget how much you may need it yourself.”</p>
			<p>It had been agreed that Mabel should write to Louise at both the points where a letter might possibly reach her, and that, until she had some certain knowledge of her sister’s plans, she should remain at L., to which place Harry’s letters should be directed, whenever he had anything to communicate.</p>
			<p>Two days after her brother’s departure, Mabel’s suspense was to some degree relieved by a few hasty lines from her father, dated from a Western post-town, and simply confirming the fact of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s death, and his own safety.</p>
			<p>The next mail, also, brought tidings from Louise. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker wrote from Cape May, stating that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy had accompanied her thither the preceding week, and had learned the terrible news the day after her arrival.</p>
			<p>“She bears the stroke with more composure than I had expected,” added <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker. “At times she is excited and hysterical, but for the most part she is tolerably cheerful, and allows herself to be comforted and consoled by the attention and sympathy which she receives from every one in the hotel. Alick seems to feel his father’s death, but Murray, poor child, is too young, I suppose, to realize the loss. Louise is now asleep on a couch in my room. When she awakes, she will add a postscript in reply to your sweet, affectionate letter which was received last evening.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s postscript consisted of a strange medley of self-compassionating and congratulatory phrases, the former, that she had experienced such a cruel shock to her nerves, and lost such a kind, indulgent husband; the latter, that she had foreseen this or some similar catastrophe, and had wisely refused to accompany <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy into that shocking Western wilderness. The only really coherent passage was that in which she deprecated the idea of her sister’s coming to Cape May where the house was so crowded, on account of the approaching regatta, that it would be impossible to obtain any accommodation. She expected to return to New York in the course of a week or two; should be glad to have Mabel meet her there, and would write again to let her know when she should leave the sea-side.</p>
			<p>The next ten days were weary ones to Mabel. She seemed to be oppressed by a fever of the spirits, and to be weighed down by some haunting fear. She found it impossible to rally her cheerfulness notwithstanding <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway’s declaration that it was nonsense to pretend she was so much overcome by the death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, who could have been little more than a stranger to her. The violence of the shock she had received, a not unreasonable anxiety concerning her father, and a painful sense of the impropriety of her sister’s situation at a public watering-place, all acting as they did on a system weakened by protracted labors in a sick-room, might well account for this seemingly unnatural depression. But so heavy was the cloud which hung over her mind during this interval, that Mabel was afterwards tempted to believe it a foreshadowing of the calamities about to ensue.</p>
			<p>A letter, at length, arrived from Harry, and with it an awkward, square-shaped epistle, directed in a strange, unsteady hand, and post-marked New York. In her eagerness to learn the contents of the former, Mabel threw the latter aside, while she perused her brother’s communication. It ran as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dearest May:</span>⁠—After three days and nights of constant travelling, I arrived at the miserable town from which father wrote to you, and found him wretchedly accommodated in a mere barn of a place, every tolerable room in the tavern, and every spare corner in the few private houses, having been appropriated to those of the passengers who were more seriously injured. Father’s escape seems almost miraculous, as he was in the front car, which rolled over twice as it fell down the embankment. He has suffered considerably from a bruise on his back, and a sprain in the ancle, which made him quite helpless for a few days. He has, also, had an uncomfortable sensation of dizziness in the head, but that is merely the natural effect of the jar, and has already begun to subside. Do not be anxious about him, for I flatter myself I make a capital doctor, nurse, cook, and housekeeper, all of which offices have devolved upon me.</p>
				<p>“As soon as he could be moved without pain, we came to the farm-house, situated on father’s property, where he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy have had a temporary residence this summer. It may truly be termed a lodge in the vast wilderness, for though situated on a street of imposing breadth, in the heart of an extensive township, the place is literally a city in prospective, a few straggling houses constituting the village, while a wide, rolling prairie stretches from the rear of our habitation to the verge of the horizon. The situation, however, is at once grand and picturesque; for on the western side we overlook a beautiful, winding river, whose well-wooded banks form a refreshing belt of shade, and in the grove, which is but a short walk from the house, we have buried poor Leroy. You would be amused with our house-keeping. The man who has had charge of the place is unmarried, and we keep a complete bachelor’s hall. The house, however, is convenient, and has been tolerably well fitted up during the summer campaign, so that, although we are not luxuriously accommodated, we are very comfortable; as much so, at least, as men can be independent of woman’s genius and aid. I tell you this because we shall probably remain some time in our present quarters, and you will be desirous to know how we are situated.</p>
				<p>“Father’s affairs, which were somewhat involved, are rendered more so by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s sudden death. I find I can be of essential service, especially as an amanuensis, and shall not think of leaving him until his business is settled. He seems to take it for granted that you will continue in L. for the present, and that Louise will remain at the sea-side, or go to some quiet boarding-place in the country. If we should be detained here into the winter, however, which I have little doubt will be the case, he will probably suggest some other plan. At present he is too weak, and too much harassed by perplexities, to decide upon anything more than a temporary arrangement. I cannot bear to think, dear May, of your being subjected any longer to Aunt Ridgway’s over-bearing temper and restrictions. I can almost believe you would be happier here, where, at least, one is independent. This is indeed a glorious country. I feel a larger life stirring within me, when I breathe the free air of these noble woods and prairies. It inspires me with new energy, and gives me strength to believe that with God’s help I may yet live to some worthy purpose, and that my darling sister may never again have cause to weep at the disgrace of her brother,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Harry.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It is doubtful how long Mabel might have sat pondering the contents of Harry’s letter, and especially its final clause, had not her aunt Ridgway, as she crossed the room, observed the other document laying in her niece’s lap, and exclaimed, “What a queer looking letter! Missent twice,” added she, as she took it up and surveyed it with those keen eyes which had never yet required spectacles. “Strange that anybody who could write at all shouldn’t know how to spell the name of this town.”</p>
			<p>Mabel’s curiosity being thus reawakened, she tore open the letter. It was from Lydia Hope, and dated a week back.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Miss Mabel,</span>” wrote Lydia, “I’m afraid you don’t know that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy is very sick at the hotel here in New York. I hated to frighten you, and didn’t know how to tell you of it without; but mother says you ought to know, for it wouldn’t be like you not to come right away. When she first took sick, Cecilia sent for us, and we’ve been here ever since. Cecilia has gone back to Cape May to wait on another lady. Mother does the best she can, and I try to be of some use. The folks in the hotel are very good, and the doctor comes ever so often; but he can’t seem to help her, and she’s getting very bad. Oh, Miss Mabel, we wish you were here, and we hope you will start as soon as you get this.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Very dutifully and respectfully yours,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Lydia Hope.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>With a trembling heart, but maintaining, nevertheless, that self-command and energy with which a strong mind braces itself to meet every emergency, Mabel at once prepared to obey this trying summons. There was no time to be lost, for she might already be too late to render any assistance to poor Louise; and her resolution to depart immediately, was equally unshaken by her aunt Margaret’s inveighing against the solitary journey, as being the height of impropriety, and her aunt Sabiah’s tearfully remonstrating against the exposure to a disease which she felt sure was something contagious. By starting a little before day-break the next morning, she could reach New York at night-fall; and whatever dread she might at another time have felt at the thought of travelling unprotected and alone, the still greater dread of delay banished every minor consideration.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway, who, if she agreed with Sabiah on no other point, shared all her prejudices against Louise, and felt for her neither affection nor sympathy, took more than one opportunity of protesting that this hot-headed proceeding on Mabel’s part was entered on with her entire disapprobation, and that she never again would undertake the responsibility of having young people in her house. As this expression of her resolution was still further enforced by the energetic orders which she that evening gave her servants, in Mabel’s hearing, to take up the carpets the next day, and otherwise prepare to renovate the rooms which had been occupied by herself and Harry, Mabel plainly understood that she had nothing further to expect from her aunt’s hospitality; and when, therefore, she drove from the door, in the dim morning light, it was with the full consciousness that she was bidding the town of L. a final adieu.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
