<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>How wondrous are God’s secret ways!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The chastening furnace of affliction</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Taught this young maiden’s heart to praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her Lord in streams of benediction!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sorrow, and poverty, and pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Might hide from sight the blessing streaming</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Heaven on her fair head; but plain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unto the eye of faith ’twas gleaming.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">E. L.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Night Watches</i>.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Leaving Mabel to the soothing influence of youthful slumber, let us follow one of equal years, but of far different fortunes, who, at a somewhat earlier hour in the evening, might be seen, alone, unprotected, and on foot, hastening down a neighboring street.</p>
			<p>The duties of the day fulfilled, the children sunk in sleep, and her mistress’ evening toilette completed, the weary Lydia sought <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker’s apartments, and having persuaded that lady’s good-natured maid to take her place in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s nursery, threw on a well-worn bonnet and shawl, and promising to return in an hour, passed down a back stair-case and left the hotel at a quick pace.</p>
			<p>The night was dark, and the walking bad, being in some places wet, and in others slippery with the half-congealed rain. Lydia was thinly shod, and had not walked many rods before her feet were thoroughly soaked, and her whole frame shivering with the cold. She felt timid, too, at being alone in the streets at so late an hour, and as she ventured into the narrower and darker lanes of the city, cast more and more anxious glances around her. Once, in her haste, she slipped, and would have fallen, but a rude, though kindly hand, was suddenly stretched forth for her safety, and before she could see whence came the friendly aid which had abruptly restored her to her feet, her beggarly-looking benefactor had passed on. Still more alarmed at the attention which this little circumstance attracted, and disturbed at the quick, and as the overexcited girl imagined, the curious glances bestowed upon her by one or two passers-by, she now commenced running, and had proceeded some paces without looking to the right or left, when, as she gained a street corner, a hand was suddenly laid upon her shoulder. She gave a quick and nervous start, but, re-assured by the sound of a familiar laugh, checked herself in her rapid progress, and exclaimed, quite out of breath, but in a tone of evident relief, “Why Jack, is that you? How you frightened me?”</p>
			<p>“What are you afraid of?” asked the other, in a rough, but boyish tone.</p>
			<p>“Afraid of everything,” said Lydia. “I am not used to being out in the night, and you ought not to be either; who is that with you?” added she, in an undertone, as she caught sight of a figure lingering near them.</p>
			<p>Jack hesitated, and then replied, somewhat reluctantly, “Bob Martin.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Jack!” was the only response the girl made, but the tone of her voice conveyed reproof.</p>
			<p>Her brother, for such was the relation between the two, looked down, marked a little circle on the snow with his foot, and was silent.</p>
			<p>“Come,” said Lydia, “I am going home, and I am in a hurry. I have only an hour to stay. Come with me, Jack.”</p>
			<p>The boy made a reluctant movement to accompany her, at the same time whistling significantly to his companion, a youth much taller than himself, and who, with an independent and swaggering air, had sauntered down the street in the direction the brother and sister were pursuing.</p>
			<p>“Hush!” whispered Lydia; “don’t call that boy,⁠—I don’t want him.”</p>
			<p>“Well, come along, then,” said Jack, roughly, and he moved in the direction of home. They had not proceeded far, however, before they overtook Bob Martin, who was purposely loitering under the shadow of a building, and as they passed him, Jack spoke, under his breath, but loud enough to be distinctly heard by Lydia, “You wait here, Bob,⁠—I’ll be back in a jiffy.”</p>
			<p>The two walked on for a few moment in silence, then Lydia exclaimed, with considerable irritation of manner, “I wonder what mother would say, Jack, if she knew you were out with Bob Martin at this time of night!”</p>
			<p>“Mother doesn’t know anything about him,” replied the boy, “nor you either. Bob’s a real good fellow!”</p>
			<p>“Why Jack,” cried Lydia, “how can you say so? You know he is the most idle, profane boy in the neighborhood; I should think you had had warning enough to keep out of his way.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t care,” said Jack, “he is a real good-hearted fellow, anyhow.”</p>
			<p>“I should think you would be ashamed of yourself, Jack,” said Lydia, vehemently, “to be standing up for such a fellow as he is!”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t he stand up for me, I should like to know?” retorted Jack, angrily.</p>
			<p>A glance of scorn shot from Lydia’s eyes, as she replied in a contemptuous tone of voice, “Well, if I were in your place, I wouldn’t say much about that.”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked Jack, turning almost fiercely upon her.</p>
			<p>“Because,” answered she, with temper, “if you like to talk about it, I don’t.”</p>
			<p>“Poh!” exclaimed Jack, attempting a braggart tone, in spite of the evident mortification which overspread his face at his sister’s words.</p>
			<p>A long silence ensued, broken only by an occasional whistle from the boy, who walked at Lydia’s side with a shuffling gait and a forced air of unconcern. At length, the latter asked, with some abruptness, “How is Rosy?”</p>
			<p>The question seemed to have a magical effect upon the boy. He ceased whistling, and the careless, blustering tone in which he had previously spoken, became subdued and tremulous as he replied, “She aint any better; I don’t believe, Lyddy, she ever will be.”</p>
			<p>Lydia did not answer, and they reached their destination without another word being spoken. Jack, having accompanied her to the door, now drew back, as if he had no thought of entering, and she, seeing the movement, paused and looked in his face with eager scrutiny, while she said, “You don’t mean to go back to him to-night?”</p>
			<p>“But I do, though,” was the defiant reply.</p>
			<p>Lydia expostulated with injudicious warmth, and a short and somewhat sharp dialogue between the two, resulted finally in the irritation of both parties, and a resolve in the mind of the self-willed boy to enjoy the society of his friend whenever he pleased, in spite of his sister’s well-meant but unavailing interference.</p>
			<p>The truth of the case was this. The Hope family, of which Lydia and Jack were members, had, a few weeks before, been subjected to agitation and alarm by the sudden tidings that the latter, with a party of rude companions, had been engaged in a street brawl, and was shut up in the watch-house for the night, with the prospect of being next day committed to jail. From this situation he had only been rescued upon the payment of a heavy fine, which consumed the hard-earned savings of his mother, and compelled his hitherto indulged sister to seek the service she now fulfilled at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s.</p>
			<p>The poor widow, already nearly weighed down by misfortune, bowed her head in silence at this new stroke, uttered few complaints, greeted her son on his return home with few reproaches, save those which were conveyed in every line of her despairing countenance, and pursued her daily labor with a slow step and apathetic air, which spoke of a weary, care-worn frame, and a heart grown old and seared amid anxiety and trouble.</p>
			<p>But Lydia had not yet reached that degree of hopeless submission, nor had she learned in the school of hardship and disappointment that meek forbearance which has its source in Christian faith. Moreover, her spirit could not easily brook the mortification and distress which Jack’s misconduct had entailed upon them all, and she assumed more than an elder sister’s privilege in the harsh rebukes which she bestowed upon the offender, and the bitter scorn which she heaped upon his idle and profligate companions, especially Bob Martin, a recent and most unprofitable associate.</p>
			<p>Jack could not deny the fact that Bob had led him into difficulty, but he still insisted, with grateful warmth, on the debt he owed him for the ability and shrewdness with which he had conducted their mutual defence, obtaining their liberation after a single night’s imprisonment at the police station.</p>
			<p>To every accusation brought against his new friend by the incensed Lydia, he was ready, as we have seen, with the prompt rejoinder, “He’s a good-hearted fellow, any way, and stood up for me when all the rest were only thinking how they should get clear of the scrape themselves.”</p>
			<p>Thus, this mortifying adventure served, on the whole, to confirm rather than weaken the influence which the experienced offender had gained over his young and unsophisticated companion, who, long since emancipated from his mother’s control, and still less disposed to submit to Lydia’s dictation, now appeared to acknowledge no authority save that of the city magistrates, of which his recent experience still held him in awe.</p>
			<p>But, although blind to the silent woe painted on his mother’s features, deaf to the unsparing rebukes of the injured Lydia, and steeled against the ill-opinion of the neighborhood, there was one gentle influence against which the boy’s rebellious spirit was not proof. There was one eye which followed him, even when absent from its presence,⁠—one voice which never spoke to his ear unheard,⁠—one little hand whose restraining pressure had power to check him in his headlong career. Gently and noiselessly had the spell been cast around him; but the boy’s rude nature softened, and his heart bowed down with something like holy awe, when he listened to the sweet, loving words, or gazed upon the little withered form of his invalid sister, Rosy.</p>
			<p>She alone had received him after his disgrace, in that spirit which at once whispers to the contrite heart of sorrow, forgiveness, love, and hope. She had extended her little trembling hand, and while the tear started to her large blue eye, had pressed it to her fevered cheek, and murmured, in broken accents, “you will not stay away from Rosy another night?” and he had laid his head on her pillow and wept, though no one but Rosy knew it.</p>
			<p>There was a chord in his heart, the secret spring of which this sick little sufferer alone had power to touch. Often, amid noisy and contentious scenes, did this one tender and plaintive note break in upon the discord; and thus it happened that, on the evening in question, when Lydia, in the tumult of excited feeling, was about to lay an impetuous hand upon the latch of her mother’s door, she was checked by a sudden and hasty caution from Jack, who, immediately after a storm of angry invective, exclaimed, in a more gentle tone, “Hush! Lyd,⁠—don’t make a noise,⁠—like enough Rosy’s asleep,⁠—she was when I came away.”</p>
			<p>This door, the upper part of which consisted of glass, and thus answered the purpose also of a window, led directly into a low, dimly lighted, and ill-furnished shop; and notwithstanding Lydia’s precautions, a little bell attached to the entrance tinkled loudly as she entered. She paused a moment, until the sound should have died away, and was then advancing into an inner room, when she was met by her mother, whose quick ear had caught the ever-welcome sound of the bell, and who was eagerly hastening to wait upon the supposed customer.</p>
			<p>“Why, Lyddy, is that you?” she exclaimed, her sober face relieved by a sickly smile, as the parent prevailed over the shop-keeper, and her disappointed hopes of a purchaser for her goods gave place to maternal satisfaction at the sight of her child.</p>
			<p>Then, bestowing on her a more careful glance, she added, in an anxious tone, the smile at the same time dying away from her pale face, “What is the matter, child? How wet you are! here, come into the back room⁠—I’ve got a fire in the stove;” and she stepped into a small apartment behind the shop, Lydia following her with a languid step and quivering lip. It was a mere box of a place, uncarpeted, scantily furnished, and with a close, unwholesome atmosphere. The flames which were crackling in the stove had evidently been but recently kindled, for the mixture contained in a large kettle, placed directly over them, had not commenced boiling, and the air in the room was chilly. Lydia threw her bonnet on a table, seated herself in a chair beside it, and fixed her eyes moodily in the direction of the stove. Her mother stirred the mixture. Neither of them spoke. At length a long sigh from Lydia broke the silence. “Do tell me what has happened,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope; “something has gone wrong, and I may as well know first as last;” and as she spoke she stretched out her hand and gently closed the door which led into a little sleeping-room beyond. Then, as Lydia still continued silent, she added, “have you left your place?”</p>
			<p>“Not yet,” exclaimed Lydia, the self-control which had been but ill-maintained before, now giving way entirely, and her voice half-choked with sobs; “nothing so dreadful is the matter, and I wish I hadn’t come here to-night; I don’t see what I did for,⁠—only⁠—only⁠—” and here she covered her face with her hands, and fell to weeping so bitterly that she found it impossible to utter another word.</p>
			<p>The poor mother looked distressed, and continued her operations at the stove with a vacant air, her eye resting on her child. A somewhat commonplace and practical character, and constant familiarity with trouble, forbade any more marked demonstration of anxiety. Her sympathy was none the less keen, however, and from time to time she uttered interjectional phrases, designed to call forth an explanation of this new sorrow, and subdue its effects.</p>
			<p>Not until the girl had indulged in a short but hearty fit of weeping, did she pay any regard to the “Come, Lyddy!⁠—now don’t Lyddy!” with which her mother from time to time addressed her. At length, however, she lifted up her head, shook it with a determined air, wiped the tears from her stained face, and drawing near the stove, took off her shoes and placed her wet feet upon the hearth. Encouraged by these favorable symptoms, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope seated herself in an opposite chair, and soon had the satisfaction of hearing from the now loosened and voluble tongue of Lydia an explanation of her agitated state of mind. Greatly relieved was she, also, to become assured that this unusual agitation had sprung from causes far less serious than her imagination had pictured.</p>
			<p>Still the poor woman could not listen unmoved to a detailed account of the injustice and abuse which her child had suffered, nor could she fail to share the suspicion and dread which had been excited in Lydia’s mind by Jack’s recent display of obstinacy and self-will, a full report of which was unhesitatingly poured into her ear.</p>
			<p>Had Lydia been a heroine, had she even been a girl of spirit, she would not have fled to her mother with this long list of troubles. She would either have staid away from the abode of poverty and sickness, or would have come hither with a cheerful countenance. She would have drawn a veil over her own grievances, and pondered deeply upon Jack’s disposition for bad company, before she had saddened her mother’s heart, and perhaps caused her a sleepless night, by expatiating upon his violence and folly.</p>
			<p>But Lydia was no heroine; she was only a tired, irritated servant girl, whose fortunes and spirits were both under a cloud; and so she came⁠—as hundreds of us have done in our turn⁠—to pour all her grievances into a mother’s ear, and lay her weight of sorrows on a heart already sufficiently burdened with its own.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, with a deep groan, “if you can’t stay at your place you must come home⁠—that’s all. We can’t be much worse off than we have been; and as to Jack, why⁠—if he will go to ruin, he will, and its no use to worry about it.”</p>
			<p>Such philosophy was not very consoling; still Lydia’s load of care seemed lighter, now that her mother had taken up the burden; and recalling the one bright feature in her day’s experience, she proceeded to relate the incident of Mabel’s interference, at the same time drawing from her pocket the price of her painful services, advanced to her from such an unexpected quarter. But, greatly to her surprise and grief, her mother refused to receive the money. “You will find plenty of use for it yourself, before you get another place,” said the poor widow, who inwardly shrunk from appropriating the wages of Lydia’s daily slavery. “You haven’t a decent pair of shoes to your feet,” added she, glancing at the worn and almost useless slippers now drying on the stove.</p>
			<p>“Oh, take it, mother, do take it!” exclaimed the mortified and repentant Lydia, at once perceiving the effect of her own selfish murmurings.</p>
			<p>“Hark!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, softly, without seeming to notice her extended hand. They both listened. A low sound was distinctly audible through the closed door of the bed-room. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope made a motion to rise, and at the same instant the shop-bell was heard to ring. Lydia started forward, saying, eagerly, “I will see if Rosy wants anything, mother, while you mind the shop.”</p>
			<p>Let us follow Lydia into the bed-room. There is a taper dimly burning there, an indulgence always craved by the sick child, who propped up by pillows is reclining on the bed. It would be difficult to guess her age; for though her little wasted limbs and tiny hands would seem those of a young child, there is no youthful glow in the pale and sunken face resting on the pillow. Her hair is light, and has a golden tinge; her transparent forehead is marked with deep blue veins; there is a dark circle beneath her eyes; her features are narrow and contracted; her thin lips pressed close together as if sealed in that position by long and persevering efforts to repress every indication of the pain which has, nevertheless, set its seal on each line of her expressive face. There is no beauty, no loveliness, no childish promise in that pinched and narrow countenance, on which disease has stamped itself for years. Only in the deep blue eyes, which like brilliant jewels seem starting from their withered settings can one read aught of hope; nor is it any earthly hope with which the soul seems ever looking forth from those bright windows, on⁠—on through the mists of time, to some happy, though unknown land, where the patient little sufferer may hope to rest.</p>
			<p>Lydia opened the door so noiselessly, that the sound was unheard by her sister, who had awaked from sleep with the moan which had been heard in the next room, but who now commenced singing, if that could be termed singing which consisted merely of a low, warbling sound,⁠—a few soft syllables, chanted again and again,⁠—to a tune of her own composing. Her eyes were fixed on the opposite wall, and she did not observe Lydia’s entrance, until the latter stood close beside her. She then turned her head slightly, unclasped her thin hands and laid one of them on the hand of her sister, saying softly, “Lyddy!”</p>
			<p>Lydia sat down on the side of the bed. Who would have believed, to see the pretty, well-grown young woman, and the puny, sickly child, that there was a difference of but five years in their ages! but so it was, for Rosy’s little withered form had already numbered thirteen summers.</p>
			<p>“Have you been very sick to-day, Rose?” asked Lydia in a low voice.</p>
			<p>“O Lyddy,” said the child “I’ve had to sing all the time when I have been awake.”</p>
			<p>Lydia sighed, for Rose had told her in confidence, just before she left home, that she never sang except when in great pain.</p>
			<p>“O, poor Rosy!” she exclaimed, in a tone of deep compassion.</p>
			<p>“No, not poor,” said Rose, thoughtfully, “not poor;” and fixing her eyes upon the opposite wall with that earnest gaze which seemed to look far off into the future, she added⁠—“little pilgrim and I have kept each other company all day,⁠—the path is dark, Lyddy, but God’s blessed angels keep watch above the clouds, and the way grows brighter at the end, you know.”</p>
			<p>As Rosy spoke, Lydia’s eyes unconsciously sought the object to which the child’s attention seemed riveted, as if striving to discern in it the source of that rapt and serene joy, which now lent a momentary glow to her sister’s sunken features. The feeble light of the taper shone directly upon a small, but exquisite engraving, which, neatly and even richly framed, was strangely incongruous with the meagre furniture and time-stained walls of the apartment, being the only object of taste or luxury which the room afforded. A portion of the picture was in shadow, but the figure of a youthful traveller was discernible in the foreground, above whose head rolled many a dark and threatening cloud, while the path beneath his feet was obscure and narrow. He trod with an assured step, however, and an eye uplifted to the spot where, in the clearer firmament, three cherub heads might be distinctly seen, looking forth from above the silvery summits of those very clouds, which at their base were so dark and fearful.</p>
			<p>It was no new appeal which this little fellow pilgrim made to the sympathizing heart of Rosy,⁠—no fresh lesson of encouragement and hope which she drew from the sight of the angel-guard, set above life’s dreary pathway. For many a year, the picture had accompanied her from one room to another, hanging always opposite her bed, during the long weeks of illness that had often confined her to her pillow. But its eloquence was not exhausted yet. Every day, on the contrary, her spirit drank deeper of its heavenly lesson, and became more and more convinced of the reality of its blessed promises; while to her lonely hours of pain, it acted as a soothing balm, none the less effectual from the frequency of its application.</p>
			<p>A moment’s glance at the familiar picture was sufficient for Lydia, whose mind was not open to the language of art, more especially to those things which are spiritually discerned. None could be blind to its sacred truths, however, as they were seen reflected in the holy patience, the religious calm, which overspread the pale face of Rosy; and a deep and humble sense of contrition stole into the heart of Lydia, as she compared her own fretful murmurings with the saint-like submission of the child. “O Rose!” cried she, her self-reproach bursting forth with a sudden vehemence which startled the invalid girl,⁠—“you make me quite ashamed of myself⁠—indeed you do! I wish I were half as good as you are. My troubles are nothing to yours, and yet I make myself and everybody else miserable; while you,⁠—you make the best of everything?”</p>
			<p>Rose looked anxiously into her sister’s face, and answered soothingly⁠—“O Lyddy! no wonder you get discouraged, you have so much to do, and so many to please, while I only have to be patient with myself. I have thought about you all the week, and have wished⁠—Oh, how I have wished,⁠—I could see you once in a while, and know how you were getting along, and whether the boys were very naughty, and if you had to sit up late every night for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy. You are all tired out, aint you Lyddy?” continued she, observing the languid, and despairing attitude into which the weary girl had thrown herself. “Here, lie down by me a few minutes and rest!” Rose threw her arm over her sister, and as the latter laid down beside her, she went on in a soft and soothing voice,⁠—“tell me all about them, Lyddy dear.”</p>
			<p>“What shall I tell?” asked Lydia.</p>
			<p>“Oh, everything, whatever troubles you most?”</p>
			<p>But that Lydia could not do. The petty vexations of the week, had sunk into insignificance in view of Rose’s patient endurance, nor could she relate to the sick child the deeper wound she had suffered on her account, with all its unhappy consequences.</p>
			<p>“I will tell you,” said she, after a moment’s hesitation, “of some one I have seen to-day, who is as beautiful as⁠—</p>
			<p>“As <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy?” inquired Rose, interrupting her.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes indeed,” answered Lydia, in a tone which seemed to disdain the comparison.</p>
			<p>“But you thought her so pretty at first!”</p>
			<p>“Did I? Well, I don’t now; but never mind. Miss Mabel doesn’t look one bit like her, though she is her sister;” and warming with the subject, Lydia lifted her head from the pillow, and leaning on her elbow with her eyes fixed upon Rosy, entered upon a glowing panegyric of her new and kind young friend.</p>
			<p>Rose seemed to catch her enthusiasm as she proceeded, and at length exclaimed with eager interest, as Lydia paused in her animated description, “Tell me more; what did she say to Alick? did he like her?”</p>
			<p>Lydia, once embarked on the subject, gave a faithful narrative of Mabel’s visit, with the exception of those particulars which related to her own difficulty with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy and consequent dismission.</p>
			<p>“Fresh, bright and beautiful! and just from the country!” said Rose meditatively,⁠—“Oh, how I should like to see her!”</p>
			<p>Lydia sighed as she thought how improbable it was that this wish would ever be gratified.</p>
			<p>“You will see her again?” said Rose in an inquiring tone.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps so.”</p>
			<p>“And you will remember everything she says, and does, so as to tell me?”</p>
			<p>“I will try.”</p>
			<p>“Just from the country!” again soliloquized Rose. “How I should like to see some one from the country.” Poor Rose had never in her life been beyond the city streets, and the country, to her imagination, was an earthly Paradise.</p>
			<p>“Rose,” said Lydia, in a hopeful tone of voice, “you must get better, so that next summer you and I can go up to the old farm.”</p>
			<p>Rose shook her head, and then as if a thought had suddenly occurred to her mind, said in a quiet whisper, “Lyddy, where’s Jack?”</p>
			<p>“Gone off with Bob Martin,” replied Lydia, some returning bitterness mingling with her tone of voice, “and I may as well go back alone,” continued she, making a movement to rise from her place by Rose’s side, “for like enough he won’t be home till morning.”</p>
			<p>“Yes he will,” said Rose confidently; “he will come to give me my drops at ten; he has never forgotten it since you went away. Is it near that time now?”</p>
			<p>“It can’t be far from it,” said Lydia. “I will go and get my bonnet and see if my shoes are dry.”</p>
			<p>At this moment Jack’s voice was heard in the shop, and just as a church clock near by struck the hour of ten, he entered Rose’s room on tiptoe, holding in his hand a cup and phial. Lydia had not yet left the room, but sat behind the bed, quite out of sight, and Bob Martin himself could scarcely have been more astonished than she was at the sight which now met her eyes.</p>
			<p>Could this be Jack, the noisy and oftentimes profane boy, who now stood near the light, carefully measuring out and counting the drops? Could it be his rough hand which was tenderly passed beneath his sister’s neck, while he gently rested her head on his shoulder, and placed the medicine to her lips? Above all, could it be his rude accents which were now softened to the affectionate inquiry, “Do you feel any better, Rosy?”</p>
			<p>Yes, it was Jack; there could be no doubt of that, for as Lydia followed him into the kitchen, after his labors as a nurse were completed, he betrayed his ordinary self by the abrupt and harsh manner in which he addressed her with, “Well, Lyd! you here yet?”</p>
			<p>“Of course I am,” said Lydia, half provoked, half grieved, at his surly manner towards her; “did you suppose I had gone back alone?”</p>
			<p>“Jack!” called Rose from the next room.</p>
			<p>He was instantly by her side.</p>
			<p>“You’ll go home with Lyddy?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“And then come back to me?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“That’s a good boy.”</p>
			<p>“Good night, Rose,” said Lydia, stooping over her bed to kiss her, while Jack went to look for his cap. “I can’t tell when I shall see you again; give this to mother when I am gone. Good night, darling;” and she left in Rose’s hands the bank-bills which her poor mother had declined receiving.</p>
			<p>It was a very dreary walk back to the hotel⁠—still raining, and very wet under foot. Jack and Lydia proceeded rapidly and in silence, the former somewhat in advance, while the latter tried to pick her way so as to avoid the puddles in the sidewalk. Both were thoughtful; both perhaps a little mortified at their recent ill humor; at all events, neither felt disposed for conversation, and a hasty good-night from Lydia, and a sulky response from her brother were all that passed between them.</p>
			<p>Perhaps the walk, with the meditations to which it gave rise, left an impression upon Lydia’s mind, for her sleep that night was haunted by the vision of a dark and dreary road on which she and Jack were travelling; sometimes Mabel seemed to be with them, leading her little nephews by the hand; and always the path was hard, and the sky overshadowed with clouds. But they went on, it seemed to her, in safety, and the way grew brighter as they went, while on every cloud an angel rode triumphant, and every angel wore the face of Rosy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
