<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Ay, years had passed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Severing our paths, brave friend, and thus we meet at last.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hemans.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>One bright morning in September, a few months after the events related in the last chapter, a modest equipage might be seen stationed at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s door, awaiting a youthful party who were about to start on a short pleasure excursion. The first shock of bereavement being past, the orphaned Helen had not refused to admit Harry’s claim to constitute himself henceforth her protector by the holiest ties; and about a week previously she had exchanged the sympathy and hospitality of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s roof for a permanent and honored place in the home and heart of Harry. The neat dwelling-house which the prosperous young farmer had recently built, and furnished with tasteful simplicity for the reception of his bride, had never yet been seen by any of his own family, and it was, therefore, with no ordinary interest and excitement, that Mabel, Alick, and Murray had projected a visit to the newly wedded pair.</p>
			<p>The weather being lovely, but the road in some places heavy and rough, a light, open wagon had been procured, as the most desirable vehicle for a thirty miles drive, and old Sorrel, a strongly-built animal belonging to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, was expected to perform the labor of the journey. Murray, a handsome, animated boy of thirteen, stood outside the door, cracking his long whip-lash and his dry jokes, while Alick, two years older, and nearly grown to man’s stature, was patiently stowing away numerous packages under the seats and on the floor of the wagon.</p>
			<p>“Aunt Mabel, are you thinking of establishing an express line?” cried Murray, “you seem to be testing the capacity of this wagon to the utmost.”</p>
			<p>Mabel laughed. “Those are articles of Helen’s property, left in my care,” said she; “handle that gently, Alick, it is her mother’s picture. Oh, there is the luncheon basket!⁠—we must not forget that!”</p>
			<p>“No, nor old Sorrel’s dinner,” cried Murray, snatching up a little bag of oats which lay on the ground.</p>
			<p>“Here is the box of papers and books,” exclaimed Sabiah, anxiously, as she stood looking on from the doorway; “you are leaving no room for that, and it is the most important of all.”</p>
			<p>“That is true,” responded Mabel; “Helen would be disappointed enough, if her father’s letters and sermons were left behind. What shall we do with that box, Alick?”</p>
			<p>Poor Alick glanced at it with a blank expression of countenance; but he was not one easily to be discouraged, and lifting it to the back of the wagon, he tried it one way, then turned it round and tried it the other way, but the vacant space would not accommodate it.</p>
			<p>“It’s no use, Al!” exclaimed Murray; “you’ll have to take out the back seat; it is the only way.”</p>
			<p>Alick hesitated.</p>
			<p>“Never mind,” cried Murray, who, when Alick’s patient expedients failed, was always good-naturedly ready to accommodate even at a personal sacrifice; “out with the old bench! now, you and Aunt Mabel sit in front and I’ll ride on the box⁠—the favorite seat always for sporting characters.” And, suiting the action to the word he vigorously exerted himself in the proposed arrangement, threw a buffalo robe over the rough packing-case, and sprung upon it, with his back to the horse and his feet dangling behind. “It’s pretty much like an English dog-cart, after all, isn’t it, grandfather?” continued he, as the spare form of old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan appeared on the door-step, “only a thousand times more jolly!”</p>
			<p>The old gentleman, whose face had worn a most mournful gravity, at what appeared to him the degrading dilemma to which the party were reduced, could not resist a faint smile, as he seldom could when challenged to it by this merry-andrew of the family; and, descending one step more, he handed Mabel to her seat.</p>
			<p>Alick gathered up the reins. “Now give him the road, Al!” cried Murray, flinging back his head and speaking over his shoulder. “I saw that the old fellow had four quarts extra last night, and this morning, too⁠—hurrah!” and, as they left the village behind them, and passed through the adjacent farms, he waved his hand to the sturdy husbandmen, whom they met by the way-side, with a mingled joyousness and civility, which drew smiles from many an honest face.</p>
			<p>For some miles their road led directly along the bank of the river, which was glowing brightly in the morning sunshine; then, branching to the left, it stretched across the rolling prairie and through the rich grain-fields, now ripening for the harvest; and anon, a heavy oak thicket refreshed them with its shade. Towards noon, they again halted by the river bank, when the boys released the horse from the wagon, removed his bridle, and placed before him his provender. Mabel, meanwhile, converted the packing-case to a new use, by spreading a napkin over it, and making it answer the purpose of a table, from which she and her nephews enjoyed an excellent luncheon.</p>
			<p>Then, after refreshing themselves and old Sorrel with a draught of cool water from the river, they proceeded on their way. It still wanted some hours of sun-set, when they came within sight of Harry’s new residence, which Alick and Murray recognized even more readily than Mabel, as occasional visits to their uncle, in times past, had made them familiar with the situation and out-buildings, while she had been there once only, and that some three years before.</p>
			<p>We pass over the cordial greeting which they received on their arrival, the delight they expressed at the evidences of comfort and taste which met them on every hand, and the cheerful evening which they passed around the fireside, when, as the night proved chilly, a bright blaze was kindled, and the young couple had, literally, their first house-warming. It would be equally in vain to attempt to follow them through the succeeding day, when the boys accompanied Harry for miles about his farm, took an inventory of his promised crops, examined his fat cattle, and drove a pair of newly-broken colts, while Mabel, beside bestowing her time and praise upon all these objects, had a thousand and one subjects of in-door interest to which Helen was eager to call her attention.</p>
			<p>“You ought to stay with us a week, a month, a year, Mabel, before we should be satisfied,” exclaimed Harry, on the second evening of their visit, as he drew her to a seat beside him. “But, since you must go home to-morrow, there is one thing which reconciles me to it: my friend Percival is to speak in your town hall to-morrow night, on some of the great political subjects that are being agitated at present, and I ventured to extend the family hospitalities to him. I felt sure you would be glad to give him a welcome.”</p>
			<p>“Glad! we shall be delighted,” exclaimed Mabel; “I shall, and so will father, I have no doubt. Boys, do you hear that? <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival is to give us a political address to-morrow night. I say ‘us,’ Harry,” added she, with an arch smile. “I hope ladies are not excluded.”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed; you must go by all means, May. I would not have you lose such an opportunity on any account. He is the most eloquent man I ever heard speak, and he is bringing his whole power into the field, for his heart is in the work he has undertaken. If father should not feel able to attend the lecture, the civilities of the house will devolve on you, Alick. Judging from your face, you will not think the occasion an unworthy one for their exercise.”</p>
			<p>Alick’s countenance was indeed full of enthusiasm at the prospect of seeing and hearing this gifted stranger, and Murray’s scarcely less so; for while the elder lad aspired eagerly to an intercourse with a man famed for high moral and intellectual attainments, the mind of the younger was equally well stored with facts illustrative of his taste for manly exercises, and his skill in all those physical exploits which captivate the mind of an adventurous boy.</p>
			<p>“It was a mere accident which prevented you from seeing Percival, Mabel, when you were here three years ago,” said Harry, “and both seasons since, he would gladly have accompanied me on a visit to my father’s, but I could not leave home at the time agreed upon. Now, however, he is sure to be there, for he never fails to keep an appointment; and, lest the duties of hostess should devolve after all upon poor Aunt Sabiah, Helen and I will speed the parting guests with an early breakfast to-morrow; eh, Helen?”</p>
			<p>Helen consented to this disinterested act of hospitality on condition of a long visit from Mabel a few weeks later, and a partial promise to that effect having been obtained, the hour for departure was fixed upon, and shortly after sunrise the travellers were on their homeward road.</p>
			<p>Old Sorrel, however, did not, like the rest of the party, appreciate the importance of the occasion, and had no sympathy with their desire to make a quick passage. The creature did not even seem, like most animals of his class, to comprehend the fact that his face was turned towards home; for Sorrel’s earlier and happier days had been passed among a drove of wild horses which enjoyed all the freedom of the open prairie; and, although now for many years reduced to servitude, he had imbibed few of the instincts of civilized life, and his temper was surly and pertinacious in the extreme. He had rewarded Murray’s care by travelling with unusual promptness, on the upward trip, but no coaxing could induce him to repeat the experiment, and at mid-day the travellers had not yet reached their previous halting place, which marked somewhat less than half the journey. It was, therefore, towards the middle of the afternoon when they at length found themselves at a point where the road, leaving the river bank, took a direct line across a prairie some six miles in extent. For the last half hour, their winding course had led them through a belt of rich woodland, under whose refreshing shade, they had paused to rest their horse, and Mabel, meantime, removing her bonnet for the freer enjoyment of the breeze, while Murray crept down the river bank and made a collection of brilliant wild flowers, which, as they continued their drive, he busied himself, on his box behind, in wreathing into a tasteful garland. “Come, old Sorrel,” cried he, standing upright on the now empty box, and, as he spoke, placing the wreath, with an air of playful homage, on the uncovered head of Mabel, “here’s a glorious race-course for you. Try now and do some credit to your mistress, while I crown her queen of the prairie.”</p>
			<p>He had scarcely uttered these words, accompanied as they were by a quick snapping of the whip on Alick’s part, when a sudden jerk and wrenching of the vehicle threw him from his elevated position, prostrate to the ground, and a scene ensued which wholly altered the face of affairs, leaving old Sorrel master of the race-course indeed, and Mabel an enthroned, but utterly helpless queen.</p>
			<p>The road, where it left the thicket, diverged into two travelled routes across the prairie, which, though pursuing the same general direction, were wholly distinct from one another, and Alick had purposly avoided that which they had chosen on their previous trip, on account of a wide gully that intersected it, and which recent rains had transformed into a slough of deep, black mud. This same gully stretched across the opposite road, but a bridge of logs had been thrown over it for the convenience of travellers. Unfortunately, however, the rain which had made the one almost impracticable, had rendered the other positively dangerous, by displacing one of the logs, and leaving a most insidious flaw in the rough and hastily-constructed bridge. With a stumble and a plunge, old Sorrel had escaped falling into this trap for the unwary, but the impetus given to the animal’s speed both by Alick’s stroke of the whip, and the disaster which immediately followed, proved fatal to the safety of the vehicle.</p>
			<p>In a single moment of time, before the travellers had discovered their danger, the front wheels of the wagon were precipitated into the hollow between the logs, the shafts were instantaneously broken into shivers, and the frightened horse had succeeded in clearing himself from the traces and bounded off to a distance.</p>
			<p>No one was injured, for Alick and Mabel had maintained their seats in spite of the shock, and Murray was unharmed by his sudden fall; but their situation was ludicrous and provoking in the extreme. Before them lay the wide expanse of prairie, on which not a single object was discernible save the figure of their raw-boned steed, who, prancing and throwing up his heels in the distance, seemed to be taunting them with their misfortune and triumphing in the sense of freedom. Behind them was the little thicket from which they had just emerged, and they well knew that there was not a human habitation within a distance of several miles in either direction. But desperate as the case might seem in a practical point of view, its comic effect was irresistible; and, after exchanging with each other a single glance of dismay, the united trio broke into a simultaneous fit of laughter. Alick and Mabel presently controlled their sense of the ridiculous so far as to utter a few ejaculations of inquiry and regret, but Murray, as he stood first glancing at the pair who occupied in regal state the seat of the broken wagon, and then at the enfranchised horse who at a safe distance was performing an evolution around them, shook with a merriment so hearty and contagious, that it was impossible to take counsel in reference to their difficulties.</p>
			<p>At this crisis a sound was heard proceeding from the adjacent thicket, which had the effect of composing the group into an attentive and listening attitude; and in the silence which now reigned among them, it was not difficult to recognize a human voice breaking on the air in most harmonious song,⁠—a song so deep, full, and clear that its music seemed to make the wild prairie ring.</p>
			<p>All strained their ears to catch the welcome notes, and as they came nearer and nearer, Mabel’s face flushed with excitement and expectancy. She had heard the voice, the words, the glorious harmony but once before, and yet, though years had passed over her since, and it seemed a marvel too great to be fully realized, she knew that she could not be mistaken in their source.</p>
			<p>A moment more, and a figure on horseback emerged from the wood, and as he caught sight of his unexpected audience, ceased singing and came forward, looking about him as if striving to comprehend the scene. He was a young and powerfully-built man, dressed in a simple hunting-suit; and the rifle which was slung over his shoulder, and the string of prairie-fowl suspended from his horse’s neck, proclaimed him to have been shooting successfully in the vicinity. He was a traveller, moreover, as might be conjectured from the saddlebags and heavy surveyor’s blanket strapped to his saddle, and travelling quite at his leisure, too, if one might judge from the pace at which he rode. Nor was it strange that the natural burst of song died upon his lips, and his face indicated inquiry and surprise at the novel and picturesque scene which presented itself before him. Two youths, one a boy, the other a mere stripling, stood beside the broken vehicle (for Alick had by this time alighted), and alone in her elevated position, in the midst of an unbroken prairie, sat a young and beautiful girl, unconsciously crowned with the brilliant wreath which Murray had placed on her head at the moment of the accident, while, at some distance, the sorrel steed, with a portion of his harness sweeping the ground, was triumphantly curvetting in forgetfulness of his years. The ludicrous nature of the occasion would have provoked the most stoical nature to a smile, and such was the effect of a first glance at the little group, upon the face of the new-comer. As he drew nearer, however, and surveyed the party more attentively, other and less easily defined emotions were depicted on the young man’s countenance, and Mabel’s face was suffused with the deep and conscious blush of the mutual recognition. For they were, and yet they were not, strangers. They had met before, and then, as now, he had come to her rescue, though in a far different cause. It was six years and more since, in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bloodgood’s dwelling, on the night of Harry’s disgrace, she had first beheld that manly form and those noble features; and now, after this lapse of time and under the most opposite circumstances, they had met again in the solitude of a Western prairie.</p>
			<p>The embarrassment which ensued, however, was but momentary, for Bayard was a man of action; and before a second glance could be exchanged between them, he had read with his quick eye the exact condition of affairs, and, without drawing near enough to ask or obtain a syllable of explanation, he had darted off in pursuit of the runaway steed. The task which he had thus promptly undertaken was no easy one; to an unpractised rider it would have been next to impossible, for time and habit have no power to efface from the once wild horse of the prairie the recollection of his ancient freedom, and the sudden recovery of it seemed at once to have restored old Sorrel to his juvenile strength and fleetness.</p>
			<p>But Sorrel, even in his best days, had never been a match for the superior animal on which Bayard was mounted; and this fact, combined with a degree of dexterity which the young man had acquired from experience, gave him an advantage over the runaway which resulted in his speedy capture. Mabel and the boys looked on with intense and eager interest, while now describing a rapid circle, and now darting in an unforeseen direction, the accomplished horseman, partly by speed and partly by skilful manœuvre, gained the advantage of the deserter, and, after a few moments’ hot pursuit, grasped him by the bridle and came bounding over the prairie with his unwilling captive. Mabel, who had stood upright in the wagon during the excitement of the chase, now gave her hand to Alick and sprang to the ground, just in time to greet with a smile of acknowledgment and thanks the victor in the animated chase, who rode up, laughing himself at the nature and success of his exploit; and springing lightly from the saddle, put the bridle of old Sorrel into the hand of the admiring Murray, and, with one arm passed through that of his own horse, lifted his hat and bowed respectfully and gracefully to Mabel, saying⁠—“You have met with a serious accident and delay, Miss Vaughan, but I hope you have none of you suffered any personal injury.”</p>
			<p>“None at all, thank you,” replied Mabel; while the boys looked their astonishment at hearing her name so confidently spoken by the stranger. “You have paid the heaviest penalty for our mishap, in the exertion you have so kindly made. We were truly fortunate in having a friend at hand.”</p>
			<p>She spoke the simple word <em>friend</em> with an accent which expressed how deeply and gratefully she felt its force; perhaps he understood that it had reference to the past as well as the present, for he replied in a tone equally impressive in its sincerity, “Nothing can make me happier than to be of service to you;” and then, as Murray eagerly commenced relating the circumstances of the accident, he proceeded to an examination of the disabled vehicle, which, with the boys’ assistance, he easily raised from the hollow into which it had sunk.</p>
			<p>Its shattered condition, however, proved to be such as to wholly unfit it for use, and the possibility of removing it across the prairie was even doubtful. Some of the principal bolts had given way, and the springs were also broken; but Alick volunteered to supply the place of the former by strong wooden pegs, while Bayard, placing his saddle-bags and blanket on the floor of the wagon, employed the straps by which they had been fastened in binding up the splintered shafts; after which, old Sorrel was once more harnessed to the wreck, and it was found that by carefully leading the horse over the level road, the decrepit equipage could be safely transported.</p>
			<p>“The frail nature of our repairs, Miss Vaughan, and the broken springs, render it impossible to occupy the wagon,” said Bayard, approaching Mabel, who stood a little apart, “but if you will do me the honor to make use of my horse, we can render the saddle comfortable for you with the help of this blanket;” and, as he spoke, he unfolded the rich and ample mantle of deep blue cloth and commenced laying it in heavy masses over the back of the animal, which stood arching its glossy neck, as if it, as well as its master, were proud of the proposed honor.</p>
			<p>Mabel earnestly deprecated the arrangement; begged that he would not suffer them to interfere further with his journey, and insisted that she could walk, in company with her nephews; but Bayard, having assured himself that her refusal did not proceed from any fear of his high-spirited horse, answered all her objections with the simple assurance that he was not in haste; that a walk of ten miles, which was the distance to the village, their common destination, was a trifle to one of his pedestrian habits; and the boys having united their persuasions to his, she blushingly and gratefully suffered herself to be assisted to the saddle.</p>
			<p>“Have you seen my bonnet, Alick?” said she, as they were about to start. He handed it to her from the wagon, and as she prepared to put it on she became, for the first time, conscious that the garland, which she had noticed when Murray commenced weaving it in the wood, rested on her brow.</p>
			<p>“Murray, you rogue!” exclaimed she accusingly, as she snatched it from her head, and flung it with such precision that it rested on the crown of his hat.</p>
			<p>All burst into an involuntary laugh, in which Mabel could not resist joining, though glad to hide beneath her bonnet the face which became crimson as she reflected on the singular and ludicrous inconsistency which Bayard must have detected between her crowned head and the awkward dilemma in which he had discovered their party. She little knew that she had never, in all her life, looked so radiantly lovely as when he first caught sight of her, with the drooping scarlet blossoms contrasting with the pure whiteness of her noble brow, and mingling with the smooth folds of chestnut hair, to which the sun imparted that golden tinge at once so rare and so beautiful.</p>
			<p>There is nothing which more effectually relieves embarassment than the presence of children; and whatever constraint might have been occasioned by the peculiar reminiscences subsisting between Bayard and Mabel was at once subdued by the mediatory influence of the two lads, who, excited by their recent adventure, were unusually loquacious and animated. Even Alick, though looking up with enthusiastic admiration at the stranger, whose attention to Mabel was alone sufficient to insure his grateful regard, shook off, to a great degree, the modest reserve which characterized him, and won, in his turn, the friendly interest of the young man, who never undervalued the ingenuous and original, though immature, intellect of boyhood.</p>
			<p>Thus, with Bayard and Alick walking on either side of the horse which Mabel rode, and Murray a little in the rear, performing the self-appointed office of leading old Sorrel, and interlarding the others’ conversation with his drollery, they proceeded at the moderate, though regular pace suited to good pedestrians, with a ten miles’ journey in prospect.</p>
			<p>“At what hour is this caravan expected to arrive at its destination,” cried Murray, when they had gone about a mile.</p>
			<p>Mabel looked at her watch. “It is now five o’clock,” said she, then added in a tone of regret, “I had no idea it was so late.”</p>
			<p>“I thought of Uncle Harry,” said Alick, “at the moment of the crash. I believe, when he hears of this delay and disappointment, he will complain of the broken bridge more bitterly than any of us.”</p>
			<p>“More haste, worse speed,” said Murray. “It was that last cut of the whip, Al, which settled the business so thoroughly for us.”</p>
			<p>“The boys were urging our old horse to the top of his speed at the moment of the accident,” said Mabel to Bayard, by way of explaining this little dialogue. “We already felt ourselves somewhat belated, being anxious to reach home in good season, on account of a lecture that is to be delivered in our village this evening, which we are all anxious to attend.”</p>
			<p>“I think you will yet have an opportunity of doing so,” said Bayard, glancing at his own watch; “it is now five. A lecture at this season would not commence before eight, or half past seven at the earliest. We ought, certainly, to be able to accomplish the remaining distance in two hours and a half.”</p>
			<p>“But Auntie is expected to play the part of hostess to the orator,” said Murray. “If we meet with any further delay, I fear she will strike spurs to your horse and leave us.”</p>
			<p>Mabel smiled. “Your grandfather will be prompt in claiming the privilege of having <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival for his guest, Murray,” said she. “I fear I can plead only selfish motives for being in haste. This gentleman is a stranger to us,” added she, turning to Bayard, “but one for whom we have reason to feel the most grateful esteem, and we anticipate the highest pleasure from his oratory.”</p>
			<p>“We shall do but little credit to our physical training if we are so late as to deprive you of the opportunity of hearing him,” said Bayard. “I have less fear of that than of your being disappointed in the orator, whose abilities you, perhaps, estimate too highly.”</p>
			<p>“I think not,” said Mabel confidently. “If we are in season, and we have not caused you too much fatigue, I hope you will share our enjoyment by being present at the address.”</p>
			<p>Bayard bowed, and a moment after gave a new turn to the conversation.</p>
			<p>It was nearly sunset when the party reached the extremity of the prairie; the road then followed the river bank, and as day was merging into night, and their path was, at intervals, overshadowed by foliage, the figures of the little group were gradually obscured in the twilight gloom, and their brisk and lively discourse, now and then relapsed into thoughtful silence. The church bell was ringing out clear and loud, when, at length, shortly after dark, they entered the outskirts of the now populous and thriving village.</p>
			<p>“That bell must be for the lecture,” said Alick; “it is a new acquisition to the church,” continued he, addressing Bayard, “and the sexton loves to make it heard on all occasions,” and the little party simultaneously quickened their pace.</p>
			<p>“Here we are at last,” cried Murray, as they came in sight of the familiar homestead. “Aunt Sabiah has put a light in the window, and is, no doubt, watching anxiously for our arrival.”</p>
			<p>Murray was right;⁠—Aunt Sabiah was not only watching, but listening, and his merry voice and laugh brought her directly to the door.</p>
			<p>“Will you not come in, Sir, and take some refreshment with us?” said Mabel to Bayard, as he assisted her from his horse.</p>
			<p>He thanked her, but politely declined,⁠—he had an appointment, and was expected elsewhere.</p>
			<p>“I am greatly indebted to you,” said Mabel, with feeling, at the same time frankly offering him her hand. “I do not know how to express my sense of your repeated kindness.”</p>
			<p>“Do not speak of it,” said he, receiving her hand with the same unaffected cordiality with which it was offered; “it is I who am under a lasting obligation. You have made my journey across the prairie a delightful and a memorable one.”</p>
			<p>Alick, meanwhile, was industriously restoring the saddlebags and blanket to their original places. “Keep those, if you please,” said Bayard, as the youth was also about to suspend the fruits of his shooting excursion around the horse’s neck; “if the poor fowls can be made serviceable for your grandfather’s table, my conscience will acquit me of mere wanton destructiveness;” and, having shaken hands with Alick and Murray, and glanced up at the house, where Mabel now stood in the doorway, gaily relating their adventures to her aunt, he mounted his horse and rode off at full speed.</p>
			<p>“Father has gone to the lecture already,” said Mabel to the boys, when, having delivered their dilapidated equipage into the charge of James, they came bounding into the house; “but see, Aunt Sabiah has a tempting supper prepared for us.”</p>
			<p>“Let us make haste and devour it, then,” cried Murray, throwing down his cap. “I am as hungry as a bear.”</p>
			<p>“Aren’t you tired, Auntie?” inquired Alick.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” was the answer. “I have had a charming ride.”</p>
			<p>“You’ll all feel the better for your supper, I should think,” said Aunt Sabiah, as she poured out tea for them. “I never did see anything like you, though,⁠—you, every one of you, look as fresh as roses. I believe you could travel from Dan to Beersheba and never feel tired.”</p>
			<p>“It would depend considerably upon the kind of company we had on the way,⁠—wouldn’t it, Aunt Mabel?” said Murray, somewhat mischievously.</p>
			<p>Mabel colored slightly, but with an unhesitating and intelligent smile assented to Murray’s remark.</p>
			<p>“Auntie,” said Alick, “that gentleman knew you; he called you by name once or twice. How do you suppose that happened? Did you ever see him before?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I met him in company once, Alick, some years ago, when I was staying at Aunt Ridgway’s, in L.”</p>
			<p>“Well, now, if that isn’t a coincidence!” exclaimed Sabiah. “But,” added she, with a sigh scarcely warranted by the occasion, “this is a strange world we live in; people are brought together one way and another, who never expected to meet again this side of the grave.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
