<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Oh, that men should put an enemy in</span>
						<span>Their mouths, to steal away their brains! that we</span>
						<span>Should, with joy, pleasure, revel and applause,</span>
						<span>Transform ourselves to beasts.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Shakspeare.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>There is a species of brutish self-indulgence which takes possession of the poor, the hard-working and the untaught nature. It revels in the low, degrading, and under-ground haunts of vice. It walks both by night and day, striding before the eyes of men in all its unglossed deformity, telling of starvation and rags, of wayside gutters and unmarked graves. It excites the disgust of the refined worldling, and the efforts of the brave philanthropist.</p>
			<p>There is another, and a like species of consuming demon, which treads the high places of the earth, its ugliness clothed in the garments of pride, and its depravity hid beneath the veil of luxury. Wealth ministers to its grasping influence, and oftentimes, youthful beauty and woman’s smile foster the devouring flame. Not until its fell work is well-nigh done, does the world take note of the destruction which lies in its path; but the record of its fearful march is written on many a bowed head and broken heart, while secret tears and midnight watchings, and the unuttered groans of disappointed hope, sap the very life-springs of a mourning household.</p>
			<p>The friend of humanity spares no effort to baffle the brutish wayside enemy which drags the once honest and industrious laborer down to idleness, poverty, and ruin. Shall no voice, then, be lifted up to warn, threaten, and perchance to save, the victim of that far more insidious and equally ruinous foe, which walks hand in hand with pleasure, is sanctioned by fashion and encouraged by wealth, but which leaves behind it, when its easy victory is won, a blighted intellect, a shattered frame, and all the conscious degradation of an abused and fallen nature?</p>
			<p>Oh, that the silent and secret agony which has wrung so many an innocent heart could find for itself an utterance! that the voiceless and anguished groan of the repentant spirit could give vent to its warning cry! Then might the youth just launched on a career of dissipation, vice and folly, be startled betimes by the fearful knell of disappointed hope, which rings out from the shoals and quicksands that are scattered amid the sea of pleasure.</p>
			<p>But, alas! the ill-fated victim who learns his first lessons in self-indulgence within the charmed ring of fashionable conviviality, and plunges thence into the deeper haunts of iniquity and vice, comes not back to shake the skeleton finger at those who yet linger on the threshold. Lost to self-respect, and banished from the courts which lured him on to ruin, he sinks into disgraceful oblivion, while the hearts that his misconduct has broken, betray him not with a cry.</p>
			<p>It was no sudden bound which had brought Harry to the verge of this dark gulf. Freedom from parental restraint, unlimited supplies of money, and a naturally gay and adventurous disposition, had early exposed him to the temptations which beset boyhood and youth. The love of mischief that resulted in his banishment from West Point, had been succeeded by a course of foolish extravagance, which was, however, in some degree checked by the simple mode of life that prevailed in the German university which he next attended, and the interest in literary and scientific pursuits which was there awakened. The two following years of travel served to make him well acquainted with men and manners; and amid the various trials and tests to which the youth was subjected, it must be acknowledged that he sometimes overleaped the bounds of prudence and sobriety. Fortunately the excitement of journeying, and the generous aspirations which it awakened, furnished a vent to the ardor and impetuosity of his disposition, and tempered the exposures which threatened him on every hand; still his character became gradually marked by a certain recklessness and self-indulgence which boded ill for the future.</p>
			<p>But it was not until his return to his native city that he gave himself up to a life of pleasure, and relinquished nobler pursuits for the petty gratifications of the day and hour. Idleness, however, the difficulty in choosing a profession, and the satiety of his present mode of life, all combined to undermine his strength of manly purpose; while his convivial traits and command of money, caused his society to be appreciated, and his presence sought by those who were alike skilled in administering flattery and in contaminating the heart.</p>
			<p>The point where a man loses his self-respect, usually precedes that in which he loses the respect of others.</p>
			<p>Mabel became conscious that a barrier had arisen between herself and her brother, before she suspected its cause.</p>
			<p>Perhaps, had she been less engaged with a new sentiment, she would have felt more keenly the gradual withdrawal of Harry’s confidence, and would have probed more deeply the secret of his seemingly diminished affection; at least, she would have asked herself why it was that their pleasures, interests, and tastes, which had hitherto lain in the same direction, had ceased to be in harmony.</p>
			<p>As it was, the conviction that Harry was in some degree supplanted in her own heart, forbade her to question too closely any want of devotion on his part; and if she occasionally felt wounded at his reposing less trust in her than formerly, she doubted her right to complain of a reserve which she knew to be in some degree mutual.</p>
			<p>But if the consciousness of his own unworthiness caused Harry to dread his sister’s scrutiny, the barrier between them was doubled now that she had come to share this knowledge. He no longer had occasion to avoid the eye which nervously shrunk from encountering his, or dread any expression of those suspicions on her part which, though they were ever on the alert, she sought only to hide from his observation. And yet, while Mabel had no anxiety so great as to conceal from him her participation in his fatal secret, her very anxiety betrayed her; and he became instinctively conscious that his innocent sister was suffering for his misdeeds.</p>
			<p>The consequence was, a painful and daily increasing estrangement; not the estrangement which springs from harsh looks, angry words, and mutual accusations; there were none of these. Scarcely less bitter to Mabel’s heart, however, were the averted or stealthy glance, the unexplained absence, the constrained silence, or the ill-timed hilarity, which proclaimed a mind ill at ease.</p>
			<p>How far <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and his sister shared her solicitude, it was difficult to determine. The former, in spite of his daily increasing abstraction of mind, now and then cast on his son a look of deep concern and scrutiny; and the puzzled air with which Sabiah was wont to regard her nephew, occasionally gave place to a sharp glance of reproof, as she observed his growing indifference to the happiness and convenience of the whole household. No further utterance, however, was given to their thoughts, nor was there as yet any positive evidence that the indications of misconduct in Harry had not wholly escaped their observation. Still, it could not be denied that an air of constraint had gradually crept over the family, while whatever might be the apparent subject of interest, an under current of feeling evidently pervaded their little circle.</p>
			<p>To shun the society of her aunt and father became at length scarcely less an object with Mabel, than to avoid encountering the eye of Harry. She never paused to ask herself whether it was wise or right to shrink from meeting, face to face, the calamity which she saw no way to avert; but blindly following the instinct of nature, she sought to flee from the harrowing dread which, nevertheless, pursued her like a shadow.</p>
			<p>Thus she now rushed more recklessly than ever into that life of excitement and fashion which, in reality, had lost for her the charm that it once possessed, seeking in the gay and heartless whirl of society to drown the bitter fears and forebodings which pressed painfully upon her in her home.</p>
			<p>It must be confessed, too, that her first agony of regret at Harry’s disgrace had been succeeded by a less disinterested emotion, as she thought of the mortification it would entail upon herself; and, shrinking from the companionship of her brother, she almost unconsciously gave the preference to those scenes of gaiety from which he would be sure to absent himself.</p>
			<p>The time had been when Mabel would have repelled every pleasure or honor which Harry might not share, and would have scorned to possess any interest distinct and separate from his. The school-girl of six months ago would boldly have declared, that in the face of all the world she and her brother would fall or rise together. But the Mabel of to-day, be it remembered, was not the simple-hearted pupil of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert. She had recently been trained in another school, and had unconsciously imbibed other maxims. It was not the influence of fashionable life; for that, though it might engross her time with frivolous pursuits, had failed to corrupt the generous emotions of her heart. It was the deeper, subtler influence of one who, knowing no disinterested sentiments, and believing the rest of the world as false and hollow as himself, had insidiously contaminated her innocent and affectionate nature with that refined species of selfishness which shrinks from contact with the rough edges of this world’s experience, and wards off with shrinking dread the realizing sense of aught that might interfere with its luxurious repose.</p>
			<p>Thus striving, as she did, to free herself from the consequences of Harry’s misconduct, the gulf between the brother and sister was widening day by day; and Mabel, if not aiding in the downfall of the misguided youth, was lending no hand to rescue him from ruin.</p>
			<p>Nor did she escape the mortification which she was so anxious to evade. Frequently did her cheek blanch, and the light word tremble on her lip, as she suddenly became conscious of Harry’s unexpected presence on an occasion when she had least apprehended his approach. Sometimes he would enter the assembly-room at a late hour, his face flushed with wine, and his voice elevated a pitch above its usual tone; sometimes she would meet him on her drives, careering through one of the avenues in an open gig, drawn by a steed noted on the race-course; and more than once he had attracted attention to her opera-box, by the boisterous conversation and merriment with which he had disturbed the rest of the audience.</p>
			<p>In the eyes of some of Mabel’s fashionable companions these might be evidences of spirit; but⁠—to her credit be it said⁠—her good sense, no less than her sensitive affection, were keenly alive to the disgrace and censure which they merited.</p>
			<p>Such experiences, and the apprehension of them, were sufficient to cloud her joyousness. But this was not all. Other evils soon followed in their train. Mabel’s excitable, and apparently inconsistent demeanor, exposed her to misconstruction, and that, too, in a quarter where she was most anxious that her conduct should be favorably interpreted. In the early stages of her acquaintance with Dudley, when he merely sought a mental stimulus in the satisfaction of awakening her genius and developing her intellectual nature, he had felt no disposition to put a check upon her lighter enjoyments, and had been coolly indifferent to competition. But, in proportion as he realized the power he had gained over her mind and heart, did he become jealous of any interference, real or imaginary. He made no open profession of that deeper interest with which she had inspired him⁠—an interest which had awakened in his sophisticated soul something like a genuine emotion. He even refused to acknowledge to himself the force of the feelings by which he was actuated. Their manifestation, however, took precisely the form which might have been anticipated from one of his distrustful character; and often did Mabel find herself controlled by a jealous tyranny which she could not understand, or grieved by a displeasure for which she could not account. It was easy, however, to submit to a tyranny which usually took the form of watchful devotion, and to allay a displeasure which was seldom more than momentary; and until the period when Mabel’s mind became harassed by contending emotions, no serious cause of alienation had arisen between herself and Dudley.</p>
			<p>But experience now proved that, although there was no one who could so effectually win her from the painful thoughts by which she was oppressed, Dudley was not her most efficient aid in moments of sudden agitation. Her only refuge, then, was in assumed gaiety; and it often happened that there was an individual in her vicinity who possessed at once the ability and the will to second her efforts at animation, and afford her the most easy and obvious means of concealing and overcoming her mortification and chagrin. This was a young man of lively temperament, unfailing spirits, and proverbial good nature, who was ever ready to join in a playful war of words, laugh at a pleasant joke, or take the lead in those popular and fashionable dances in which he excelled. These available qualities were always at Mabel’s disposal, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston was one of a numerous throng who perseveringly sought to render themselves acceptable to the belle of the season.</p>
			<p>Anxious only to maintain her composure, at any cost, Mabel did not realize the undue encouragement she was bestowing on her highly flattered admirer, or the severity with which Dudley inwardly commented upon her coquetry and frivolity.</p>
			<p>One evening, however, when, being more than usually oppressed by anxiety, she had sought to divert her feelings and ward off the observation of others, by accepting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston’s invitation to join in a rapid and giddy dance, she was startled, on coming to a pause, by perceiving Dudley standing directly opposite to her, with an expression of unmistakable scorn upon his features, while Harry was at the same moment rendering himself conspicuous, by bestowing upon Miss Vannecker, in an audible tone, a series of absurd compliments, which he would never have uttered in his sober senses.</p>
			<p>Half fainting from a conflict of painful emotions, she sank upon a chair, and her agitation reached its height when Dudley crossed the room, and addressed her in the sarcastic tone which he so well knew how to assume: “Miss Vaughan,” said he, “I am glad to see you in such spirits to-night; the recollection of your animated enjoyment of this scene will cheer me during my absence from the city.” And with a frigid bow he left the room.</p>
			<p>He despises me, thought Mabel, for my frivolity and seeming indifference to what every one must perceive. But, too proud to bend beneath the weight of his displeasure, she returned his salutation with haughty coldness, and accepted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston’s invitation to take another turn in the dance.</p>
			<p>Bitter, almost heart-breaking, were Mabel’s reflections that night. For the first time, she began to doubt the wisdom, the propriety even, of the course she had thought proper to adopt, in order to veil her actual sufferings from the eye of the world. Even Dudley, thought she, believes me heartless; for attributing to him a worthier motive than that by which he was really actuated, she never doubted that it was his warm friendship for Harry which caused him to be shocked at her levity; nor dreamed that it was an overwrought and involuntary jealousy on his own account, which prompted his sarcastic comment upon her apparent enjoyment of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston’s society.</p>
			<p>And thus mistaking, as she did, the cause of his disapprobation, nothing could exceed her regret at having given offence to the friend who, valued as he had long been, was never so deeply prized as in this her time of painful and humiliating sorrow. His desertion of her at this crisis seemed more than she could bear.</p>
			<p>Disappointed in her brother, blamed and forsaken by him whose voice had hitherto been a charm against utter despondency, and dreading the watchful eyes of her father and aunt, she dared not fathom her own unhappiness; but, continuing her customary round of engagements, performed her part with automaton accuracy, masking her face in smiles, and crushing down the emotions to which she dared not give way.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
