<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 29</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>In the dark winter of affliction’s hour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When summer, friends, and pleasures haste away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the wrecked heart perceives how frail each power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It made a refuge, and believed a stay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When man, all wild and weak is seen to be⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s none like Thee, O Lord! there’s none like Thee!</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jewsbury.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The morning of departure came. The landlord of the hotel had been summoned, and on Mabel’s expressing her regret that her funds were only sufficient for her present wants, had cordially assured her of his perfect readiness to wait <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s convenience for the settlement of his accounts, and had himself accompanied her to the steamboat. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope was there with shawls over her arm, and parcels in her hand; Jack was there with a huge basket of cakes and candy, provided by his thoughtful mother; Lydia was there, her eyes red with crying, and her hands busy in giving the finishing touch to Murray’s curls; and Owen Dowst was at the further end of the wharf attending to the baggage.</p>
			<p>At length they took their places, Mabel and the boys in the centre of the deck, where they were protected by an ample awning, and Owen modestly choosing a seat at the stern of the boat, where, without intrusion, he could keep the little party in sight. The bell rang and they moved off;⁠—Jack waved his cap, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope cried out “Good-bye,” and Lydia timidly threw a kiss,⁠—not at Mabel, however, or the boys, but in response to one from the stern of the vessel, where Owen stood, leaning over the railing, and looking back with a tear in his honest eye.</p>
			<p>The first day’s journey passed without any important incident. The weather, which had promised to be fair, soon became dull, and at length a pouring rain drove the passengers to the cabin, where, for many successive hours, they were crowded together, deprived of fresh air, and with no prospect of being able to venture again on deck.</p>
			<p>Here all Mabel’s powers were called into action, for the diversion and entertainment of Murray, whose restlessness could ill brook the restraint to which he was subjected in the ladies’ saloon, and who continually threatened to stray beyond its limits. Fortunately, however, Owen, who had stationed himself in the vicinity of the door, contrived to decoy him to a place on his knee, and amused and entertained him there until the bell sounded for dinner. While watching the good-natured youth, as he cut an apple into a fanciful shape, or whittled a figure from a bit of wood, the child was completely happy, and Mabel was freed from all anxiety concerning him.</p>
			<p>These ingenious and friendly devices, however, though not lost upon Alick, had no power to win him from his position beside Mabel, where, with the basket of provisions at his feet, and his arm passed through the handle of the carpet bag, he sat upright and firm as a sentinel at his post. Whether Father Noah’s exhortation, to “behave like a little man,” still influenced him, or whether he felt a proud and instinctive consciousness of being in some degree his aunt’s protector, he manifested no sign of weariness, and never once during the day uttered a single complaint.</p>
			<p>They dined and supped on board the boat, the thoughtful Owen having secured seats, and recommended them to the care of one of the waiters, whom he chanced to know, and with whom he afterwards took his own repasts at the second table.</p>
			<p>But although the gentle motion of the boat, the comparative privacy of the ladies’ cabin, and the respectful devotion of her attendant, contrived to render this first day’s experience satisfactory to Mabel and soothing to her anxieties, the interval between the arrival of the party in Albany, and their departure in the night-train for Buffalo, was replete with those incidents which constitute the trials of the traveller, and render journeying an uncertain and hazardous experiment. The boat was late at her wharf; there was some delay and difficulty in the distribution of baggage; noise and confusion prevailed in every direction, and before Owen could collect his own boxes and Mabel’s trunks, the carriages, loaded with passengers for the cars, had all driven off. Among the coaches that remained, all had one or more occupants bound in a different direction, and none of the drivers would agree to reach the station in season for the Western train. Mabel’s countenance betrayed her agitation and alarm, Alick looked piteously from one rough face to another, and Murray, dimly comprehending that something was the matter, as usual began to cry.</p>
			<p>“Look here⁠—I say,” cried Owen, catching a burly, round-faced fellow by the button, and glancing significantly towards Mabel, “don’t disappoint that lady now,⁠—it’s too bad,⁠—her folks were hurt,⁠—one on ’em killed by that bad accident last week,⁠—she’s a goin’ out there to her father,⁠—don’t you be the means of her losin’ the train.”</p>
			<p>What a revulsion of feeling such an appeal will oftentimes produce. “Do tell,” said the man. “Now that’s a case. Hullo, Sam,⁠—haul those trunks up here, will yer? Give a hand, boy,⁠—her father” (in his turn, nodding at Mabel,) “was killed on the cars last week. Look here, you,” speaking to a gaily dressed fop inside, who, seeing his valise unceremoniously thrown on to the sidewalk, was already preparing to alight; “this gentleman,” (waving his hand towards Sam) “will take you up to the hotel; I’m bound to get these tother folks down to the Buffalo cars; in with you, Bub,” and he lifted Alick, basket, carpet-bag and all, into the carriage; Mabel and Murray followed; Owen sprung up outside, and they were off.</p>
			<p>There are few things more trying to the patience, and more exciting to the nerves, than driving through the crowded streets of a city, with the apprehension that every moment’s delay may be fatal to one’s hopes. During the ten minutes that they were hurrying and rattling over the pavements, Mabel endeavored in vain to quiet her disturbed feelings, and strove, with equal want of success, to soothe the weeping Murray, while Alick silently watched his aunt’s countenance, as if it were the dial-plate of destiny. They were barely in season after all; there was just time for the luggage to be thrown hastily on board, and the last bell was sounding as Owen entered a car, with Murray in his arms, followed by Mabel and Alick, almost breathless with the haste they had made, and carrying between them the basket and travelling bag, which Alick could not transport alone, but which the sturdy boy was unwilling to relinquish.</p>
			<p>This little incident served at once to excite Mabel’s anxieties for the future, and to impress her with a sense of her dependence on Owen. She felt sick at heart, as imagination conjured up the possible disasters and delays which might ensue before the termination of the journey, and, as the darkness of the night came on, and a thick gloom settled over every object, an undefined dread took possession of her; and when Murray exclaimed with convulsive sobbing, “Auntie, Murray is tired,⁠—Murray can’t ride all night,” she was tempted to fold the child to her bosom, and weep with him over their multiplied misfortunes.</p>
			<p>Her weakness was rebuked, however, by the confiding tone in which Alick responded to his brother’s complaint,⁠—“I ain’t tired, Murray,” said he,⁠—“I wouldn’t mind going anywhere with Aunt Mabel.”</p>
			<p>“I would,” said Murray. “I want to go home.”</p>
			<p>“Let me take him a little while, Miss Vaughan,” said Owen, who had observed his fretfulness; “I see he’s getting pretty uneasy. Will you come and sit by me, Murray?”</p>
			<p>The child hesitated, too thoroughly weary to have any preference.</p>
			<p>“I’ll coax the little fellow off to sleep,” said Owen, lifting him in his strong arms, and bearing him to his own seat at the further end of the car, where, wrapped in a heavy pilot-cloth coat, and with his head resting on Owen’s shoulder, he soon fell into a quiet slumber. Two or three hours passed away. Alick, despite his efforts to the contrary, had fallen asleep, though still sitting as upright as a grenadier, and Mabel had once or twice forgotten her anxieties, and enjoyed a few moments’ repose, when a bright light shone in their faces, and suddenly awaking, they discovered that the train was stopping at a place of some importance, if one might judge by the bustle which pervaded the platform in front of the station. Murray, also, awakened by the noise and lights, ran to his aunt, rubbing his eyes, and petitioning for something to eat.</p>
			<p>“Milk, too, Auntie⁠—I must have some milk,” he cried, as she proceeded to open the luncheon-basket.</p>
			<p>“No, Murray, I have no milk for you,” was the reply; “a cake will do without milk, won’t it?”</p>
			<p>“I can get him a glass of milk, or some water, at least, Miss Vaughan,” said Owen, who was about to leave the car, and paused to offer his services. “The train stops here five minutes⁠—plenty of time, Miss. I’ll hand it in at the window.”</p>
			<p>“Take my purse, Owen,” said Mabel, “and pay for it, if you please.”</p>
			<p>The milk was brought to the window in a pitcher. Owen had a tumbler in his hand, and all were by turns refreshed with the sweet and wholesome beverage. There was still a moment or two of delay at the station⁠—ample time for the young man to return, pay for the milk, and take his place in the cars. Still, the bell rang, and the train proceeded on its way without his having made his appearance. Mabel looked back with some anxiety, but supposing that he had entered a rear car and would soon make his way to them, she did not feel any positive alarm and was therefore wholly taken by surprise when a few moments after, the conductor, as he passed with his lantern in hand, held it up to her face and said inquiringly, “Wasn’t that young fellow in the pilot-cloth coat with you, ma’am?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” answered Mabel. “Why?”</p>
			<p>“He got left behind at the last station,” said the man coolly.</p>
			<p>“Got left!” exclaimed Mabel, repeating his words in astonishment and fright, while Alick groaned aloud and Murray set up a shrill and prolonged cry.</p>
			<p>“Yes, they took some of his boxes out there by mistake, so the baggage-master says, and he caught sight of ’em and sprung off the platform just as we were starting.”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t you stop for him?” asked Mabel, in a tone of mingled appeal and reproach.</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t, no how,” said the man, though speaking in a tone of regret. “We’re behind our time now. If there’s any mistake it ain’t our fault; he couldn’t have had his things marked right in Albany. He’ll come on to-morrow, I reckon.”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow,” thought Mabel, “but where shall we be by that time?” And at the same instant the remembrance flashed upon her that he was in possession of her purse, containing all the money she had in the world.</p>
			<p>“What <em>shall</em> I do?” was the involuntary exclamation which burst from her lips as, trembling with agitation, she started up impulsively, then in a despairing manner sank back into her seat.</p>
			<p>“Can’t we go on without him, Auntie?” asked Alick anxiously, while Murray continued to cry, loudly threatening, amid his sobs, to “beat that old conductor, and make him go back for Owen.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t know, Alick, what we shall do,” said Mabel, the self-command which she had hitherto maintained in the presence of the children forsaking her at this unforeseen crisis.</p>
			<p>The interest and compassion of the other passengers were evidently awakened. Many outstretched forms were suddenly raised from a recumbent position, and many sleepy eyes turned in the direction of our little group of travellers, while a murmur of inquiry and response ran through the car. The conductor, however, had passed hastily out with his lantern, and as the feeble and expiring light from an ill-trimmed lamp above afforded little satisfaction to curiosity, most of the weary company soon subsided into their former dreamy state of unconsciousness.</p>
			<p>“God will take care of us, Auntie,” said Alick, in a comforting tone; “that old minister said so, and I believe him.”</p>
			<p>“So do I,” answered Mabel, drawing both the children as closely to her as possible, and feeling, for the second time, rebuked by Alick’s child-like faith⁠—first in her, and now in a higher power.</p>
			<p>At the same instant, a voice proceeding from the seat directly behind them, addressed Mabel in a tone of gentle but earnest inquiry. “I have been asleep, my dear; but, if I understand right, your servant has got left at Utica.”</p>
			<p>“Not my servant, except by free-will, ma’am,” answered Mabel, her face as she turned being brought close to that of the person who was leaning forward to speak to her, but whose features were undistinguishable in the dim light.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I was mistaken, then,” said the lady, apologetically. “I only judged from appearances, when you came into the car at dusk.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, ma’am, it is not strange,” said Mabel; “I don’t wonder at it, he was so kind to the boys and so civil to me. He was a good friend, and we depended upon him, and now,⁠—now⁠—”</p>
			<p>Her voice choked; she could not go on.</p>
			<p>The old lady⁠—for the stranger was advanced in years⁠—quietly rose, came forward, and taking the seat beside Mabel from which Alick had risen in the moment of excitement, said kindly, “And do you need a friend now, my dear?”</p>
			<p>Mabel could not answer except by putting her hand into that of the old lady, who pressed it tenderly.</p>
			<p>“Little brothers?” said she, drawing Alick toward her, and gently soothing Murray with the words, “Poor boy! there, don’t cry!”</p>
			<p>“She’s our auntie,” said Alick, proudly.</p>
			<p>“And where’s mamma?”</p>
			<p>“She’s gone to another world,” answered Murray, promptly.</p>
			<p>“She died last Saturday,” whispered Alick.</p>
			<p>Their new friend uttered an exclamation of pity, and, grieved at the result of her natural inquiry, forbore all further questioning.</p>
			<p>“Poor little fellows! you must both be tired,” said she. “Come, I will put you to bed.” And rising, she beckoned to a woman just behind them, and with her assistance proceeded to carry her purpose into execution. “Don’t stir; we will make them very comfortable,” she added, as Mabel proposed to assist her. And taking advantage of some vacant seats opposite, she spread upon them her own and the woman’s surplus supply of shawls, and in a few moments the exhausted children were disposed of for the rest of the night.</p>
			<p>“My child, you have seen trouble, I fear,” said the benevolent lady, as, resuming her seat by Mabel, she passed one arm round the young girl’s waist, and drew her head upon her shoulder.</p>
			<p>Mabel had in some degree steeled herself against the hardships and trials which she might encounter, but this unexpected kindness wholly overpowered her; the floodgates of her soul were opened, and her tears poured forth like rain. Her judicious comforter did not attempt to restrain her. She well knew the relief it sometimes is to weep, and without interrupting her by a word, suffered her feelings to have vent.</p>
			<p>“Lie still, dear,” said she, as Mabel, having at length become more composed, made a movement to sit upright.</p>
			<p>“You are very good; but I shall fatigue and distress you.”</p>
			<p>“Do not disturb yourself on my account,” was the reply. “I only require a few hours sleep, and I have had that already. I want to see you take some rest.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I cannot sleep,” said Mabel, “I am too unhappy.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I can help you,” said the old lady. “There are two sides to trouble,⁠—let us try and look at the bright side.”</p>
			<p>“I never gave up so before,” said Mabel, “and I know I ought not to now, but this seemed too much.”</p>
			<p>“Was this young man so essential to you, then, that you cannot get on without him?”</p>
			<p>“He was very considerate and kind,” said Mabel. “I shall miss him, and so will the boys; but that is not the worst,⁠—he has got all my money. I gave him my purse to pay for some milk for the children just before he left the cars.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is bad,” said the old lady, “but not beyond remedy. How far are you expecting to travel?”</p>
			<p>Mabel named the town and county in the eastern part of Illinois, which were her destination.</p>
			<p>“And you were to take the steamer at Buffalo?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, to-morrow night.”</p>
			<p>“There is no boat until the night following,” said the old lady, confidently. “I have made particular inquiries, as I am to pursue the same route myself. So you see Owen will have time to join you, and, meanwhile, you shall be under my care; and afterwards, too,” added she, “if you can feel confidence in an old lady who is a stranger to you, but who has seen much of the world, and is an experienced traveller.”</p>
			<p>Mabel thanked her heartily in her own name and the children’s.</p>
			<p>“Do not thank me,” said her kind friend, “the benefit will be mutual. I am fond of young people, and glad to be of use in the world. If my three score years and ten can afford you comfort and protection, then I have not grown old in vain.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I cannot tell you the relief it will be, if you will only let me keep within sight of you,” exclaimed Mabel, eagerly. Then, as she recalled the lady’s previous allusion to her being a stranger, she added, with simple candor, at the same time lifting her head, and speaking with great earnestness, “But you are very good, ma’am, to feel confidence in <em>me</em>. It must seem strange to you that I should be travelling so far, with the charge of these children, and dependent myself upon a young man who is not of my own station in life.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, a little singular, perhaps,” answered the lady, “but no more so than many things which admit of easy explanation; or, even if I were still left to wonder at the circumstance, it would not deter me from offering my aid to one who seems to need it.”</p>
			<p>“May I tell you how it happened?” asked Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Certainly, my child, if you please to do so. Tell me anything that you feel willing to confide to one old enough to be a safe, but not too old to be a sympathizing friend.”</p>
			<p>Thus encouraged, Mabel suffered her head to drop once more upon the shoulder of the tall and strongly-framed, though venerable lady, and in the darkness of the night, and amid the hush which prevailed among the sleepers who were stretched around, she poured into her willing ear, in a low and broken voice, the story of her recent family bereavements, and the sufferings, responsibilities, and perplexities, which had ensued. Her bitterest griefs and anxieties were such, indeed, as can be breathed only in the ear of Heaven, but the partial revelation which she made was enough and more than enough to excite all the tender compassion of her aged friend, as was evident from the gentle expressions of condolence which escaped her, and the affectionate solicitude with which she drew a cloak round the weary girl, and now and then pressed her closer to her side. So sweet, indeed, was this welcome assurance of protection and sympathy, that, at length, the tale being ended, and the aching heart, in some measure, relieved of its burden, tired nature asserted its claims, and a soft and refreshing sleep stole over Mabel’s senses.</p>
			<p>It was daylight when she awoke. The sun was streaming through the car; most of the passengers were sitting bolt upright in their seats, their firm attitudes seeming to defy any one who should accuse them of having slept a wink on the journey; and the whole scene was so different from that which had prevailed a few hours before, that Mabel could not for a moment realize where she was, or whether the events of the previous night had not all been a dream. There could be nothing imaginary, however, in the friendly shoulder on which her head was comfortably pillowed, nor could anything be more kind and cordial than the smile which reassured her, as starting up, she suddenly exclaimed, “Why, how long I have lain here! How I must have tired you!”</p>
			<p>“No, you have not tired me in the least. I am rejoiced that you have slept so long. How do you feel this morning, my dear?”</p>
			<p>But Mabel did not seem to heed the kind inquiry. Her eyes were fixed earnestly on the face of her new friend, while a glow of pleasure radiated her features. There could be no mistaking that benevolent countenance, that dignified form, those silver curls peeping from the snowy fluting of the widow’s cap, above all, that cheering and animating smile; and, snatching the hand of the good lady, Mabel pressed it to her lips, exclaiming, “You are not a stranger after all! I have seen you before. You are <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Abraham Percival!”</p>
			<p>“Do you know me, then?” was the reply. “That is pleasant. I have been studying your face, my dear, and thought it seemed familiar, but you must help my memory a little. I cannot recall the name.”</p>
			<p>“Mabel Vaughan; but perhaps you have never heard the whole name.”</p>
			<p>Madam Percival shook her head. “No,” said she, after a moment’s thought, “never; but I once knew a Miss Vaughan, possibly a relative of yours. She must be somewhat advanced if she is still living, which I presume to be the case, as I exchanged cards with her in New York last winter, though we had not the pleasure of meeting. We used to call her Sabiah, in her younger days.”</p>
			<p>“My aunt,” faltered Mabel, a new light dawning upon her in reference to the memorable visit, which had, as it proved, been so wholly misinterpreted.</p>
			<p>“Ah! then you are a daughter of her brother John. You see,” added she, with her winning smile, “we old-fashioned folks are always acquainted with the family tree; however, I lived in your father’s native town some years; I was an assistant teacher in the village academy, and your aunt was one of my pupils.”</p>
			<p>“Was she, indeed?” said Mabel, with interest. “Dear aunt Sabiah, how she would like to see you!”</p>
			<p>“I was in hopes to revive our acquaintance last winter,” said Madam Percival. “I have always continued to feel an interest in your aunt, and as I happened to learn her address in New York, through one of her village friends, I took an early opportunity to call; but I think it probable she has nearly or wholly forgotten me, or perhaps would only recognize me by my maiden name.”</p>
			<p>“She never knew of your visit,” said Mabel, with a blush of mortification, “she never had a chance to know. I had the vanity to take it to myself, and I was the Miss Vaughan who left a card at your door. Oh, how sorry I am!”</p>
			<p>A shade of disappointment passed over Madam Percival’s countenance also, for a moment, then she exclaimed quickly, as if anxious to relieve Mabel’s evident regret, “It was very natural, however. Your aunt probably lived a retired life.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, very,” said Mabel, “but she would have been so glad to see you.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, well!” said Madam Percival, “do not lament it too seriously, my child. Time has made great changes with us both, and the meeting might not have been wholly pleasurable. But tell me, my dear, where it is that I have seen your face before.”</p>
			<p>Mabel named the occasion.</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed, I remember now,” said Madam Percival, with evident pleasure in the recollection. “You were my grandson’s partner in the country-dance. Ah! that was a pleasant evening. We all enjoyed it much.”</p>
			<p>This reference to her own enjoyment, and that of her friends, led Mabel to speak in grateful terms of one of their number, the good clergyman, to whom she was so much indebted. Madam Percival was deeply interested by the young girl’s narrative of his deeds of Christian charity, and by the time it was concluded, the boys awoke, eager to make an attack upon the luncheon. Madam Percival left room for the children beside their aunt, by herself returning to the seat next the female attendant, who was the companion of her journey, and for some hours the ordinary events of travelling succeeded.</p>
			<p>“We shall soon be in Buffalo, my dear,” said Madam Percival at length, leaning forward and laying her hand on Mabel’s shoulder, to attract her attention.</p>
			<p>Mabel, thus suddenly roused from a sad and painful reverie, into which she had fallen, a train of thought superinduced no doubt by the disclosures and coincidences of the morning, started, turned, and said, in an abstracted manner, “Yes, and what shall we do then?”</p>
			<p>“Whatever you like, my poor, tried child; you need rest and refreshment for body and mind. I was thinking where we could best find it?”</p>
			<p>“Wherever you please,” said Mabel. “I shall be only too contented and thankful to stay with you.”</p>
			<p>“Have you ever been to Niagara?”</p>
			<p>“Never, ma’am,” answered Mabel, with a slight tremulousness in her voice, at the mention of a spot she had once so yearned to visit, but which was now associated with many a bitter memory.</p>
			<p>“We shall have twenty-four hours to spare before the steam boat leaves,” said Madam Percival. “I have consulted my little friend here (and she tapped with her spectacles the railroad guide which she held in her hand), and find that we can, if we choose, proceed directly to Niagara, and remain there until within a few hours of the boat’s sailing. It will be an uncomfortable night in the city. I am well known at the Cataract House, and we shall be sure of every outward comfort, to say nothing of the inexpressible pleasure of having a glimpse at the Falls. Do you like the plan?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Mabel, hesitating. “I would rather you should decide.”</p>
			<p>“You can scarcely be expected to have any preference under the circumstances, my dear,” said Madam Percival, laying her hand anxiously on Mabel’s flushed cheek, “but I am convinced there could be no better prescription for you than the one I recommend. The boys require rest and fresh cool air to invigorate them after the journey, but you need something more; it is the tired heart and brain which sends this feverish blood to your cheek, rather than any physical fatigue, though you have had your share of that. You are my guests for the present,⁠—my adopted children I would say,⁠—and so I feel myself at liberty to study your wants, and endeavor to supply them. Besides,” added she, with a persuasive smile and tone, which made it almost appear that she was begging, instead of conferring a favor, “we old folks, who pride ourselves on our experience, love to try our favorite remedies; so, if you leave the decision to me, we will keep on to Niagara, and risk the additional fatigue in consideration of the benefits we hope to derive from the effort.”</p>
			<p>Comprehending at once the disinterestedness of this scheme to divert her troubled mind from the contemplation of its sorrows, Mabel hastened to deprecate the idea of her aged friend’s incurring any unnecessary fatigue on her account; but Madam Percival assured her that she never suffered from the effects of travelling, and that in the present case, the necessity for one day’s delay rendered the temptation to visit the Falls irresistible, apart from the satisfaction it would be to introduce her young friends to one of the grandest wonders of nature, in which, as Americans, they had all a common birthright.</p>
			<p>So the excursion was determined on; and night found them established in a comfortable hotel, where, within hearing of the roar of the mighty cataract, they all experienced the welcome refreshment and repose which weary travellers crave.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
