<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Who scoffs these sympathies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes mock of the divinity within;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor feels he gently through his breathing soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The universal spirit.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">R. H.</abbr> Dana.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Among the engagements of the following week, there was one of a somewhat different character from the gay assemblies which constituted the chief social enjoyment of Mabel’s circle. This was a party given on occasion of some family anniversary, by a lady of high position, whose wealth, accomplishments, and superior cultivation, gave her an undisputed preëminence in the eyes both of people of consequence and of those who considered themselves such.</p>
			<p>Even <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan was induced to accept an invitation to a house where he would be sure to meet many guests of his own age, and no small number of persons distinguished in the literary and political world. Louise was not willing to lose the honor of being present at an entertainment where the company would undeniably be the most select the city afforded. Harry, while he voted these old Knickerbocker affairs pretty slow concerns, declared it an object to see things done up in good shape once in a while; and Mabel, for all these reasons combined, and, perhaps, also from the knowledge that the hostess was a near connection of Dudley’s, looked forward to the evening with unusual interest.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah was seldom included in the numerous invitations received by her brother’s family, not from any intentional slight, but because she had systematically avoided becoming generally known as an inmate of the household, and had nervously shrunk from being found in the drawing-room on reception days. She would never have dreamed, however, of mingling in society; and was satisfied, for her part, with the simple enjoyment derived from the sight of her favorite Mabel, richly attired, and appearing on each new occasion more beautiful in the eyes of her aunt. Therefore, on the evening in question, she experienced no small satisfaction from the survey of a superb dress, worn for the first time by Mabel, and her elation reached its height as she observed the ill-concealed envy which it awakened in Louise, who entered the dressing-room just as her sister’s toilette was completed. It was no wonder that the partisan spirit of the aunt was gratified, for Mabel certainly outshone herself.</p>
			<p>She wore a white flounced silk, each flounce being bordered with a pattern of delicately wrought green leaves and half-blown roses, and the graceful garland of flowers on her hair was in perfect harmony with the Parisian fabric. The waist fitted closely to the throat, where a collar of point lace was fastened with a brilliant spray of diamonds; and sleeves of the same delicate material as the collar, lightly draped her well-rounded arms.</p>
			<p>Louise, whose little, fairy-like form never looked so well as in the light and gossamer fabrics in which she floated or whirled through the dance, felt a sharp pang of jealousy, as she noted the almost regal figure of her sister, set off to advantage by the closely-fitting and heavy material which would have severely tested a less exquisite shape than Mabel’s.</p>
			<p>“I hate to go to these half-and-half parties,” said she, in a sharp and irritable tone, as she drew out the folds of her velvet dress to give it a more graceful flow, and straitening her figure at the mirror, tried to believe herself just the right height, and Mabel a little too tall. “One has to dress up as if afraid of the rheumatism, and no wonder, for if ever people do take cold, it is from standing round in corners, as we shall do to-night. It will be shockingly stupid. I’ve half a mind not to go;” and although she could not resolve to stay away from an entertainment which anybody else thought worth attending, Louise contrived by her ill-humor to make herself and every one about her so uncomfortable, that her friends were glad at last to arrive at their destination, and to see her established in one of the corners she had spoken of, where, with Victoria Vannecker, and a little knot of companions, she amused herself with making comments upon the company.</p>
			<p>The assembly was not large, and there was no music, but, as Harry had foreseen, everything was conducted in good taste, and spacious and superb as were the house and furniture, nothing gave evidence of extraneous ornament, or an attempt at display.</p>
			<p>Some of the company had evidently been their hostess’ guests at dinner, and coffee was passed round promiscously at quite a late hour.</p>
			<p>This circumstance, and the fact that the size and number of the rooms thrown open afforded opportunity for the dispersion of the visitors into little knots, gave the whole assemblage the air of a somewhat overgrown tea-party. A few elderly gentlemen, grouped together on the hearth-rug and occasionally sipping their coffee, were holding a political discussion; and a similar association of literary friends were laughing heartily at a series of amusing anecdotes related by one of their number. A travelled lady and a boyish artist were examining a book of etchings together; and a group of youths and girls, scarcely beyond childhood, had taken possession of the music room, and while one played the piano, the rest were having a merry dance.</p>
			<p>These, and various other social scenes, were indicative of the different ages, tastes, and characters, which were blended in the company; and although nonsense, scandal and ill-natured criticism, were not without their representatives, they instinctively felt themselves out of their sphere, and kept in the background; while the assembly, as a whole, was eminently distinguished for harmony, elegance, good breeding, and refinement.</p>
			<p>Mabel felt, from the first moment of her entrance, the total dissimilarity between this and most of the fashionable parties which she frequented; but, unlike Louise, at once recognized its superiority. Nor, although the youthful circle which claimed her as its ornament could assemble here but a small number of its members, did she find herself by any means destitute of acquaintances.</p>
			<p>Dudley’s partiality had not only awakened her ambition for cultivated society, but had, to some degree, gratified this preference, and already, through his introduction, had she been brought into occasional intercourse with persons of distinction, taste, and learning.</p>
			<p>Politicians, artists, noted travellers, titled foreigners, and literary lions in every department, were included in Lincoln Dudley’s extensive circle of friends; and more than one individual of some distinction among the present company, now seized the opportunity to revive and strengthen his knowledge of the beautiful girl, whose naturalness of manner, freshness of feeling, and exuberance of thought and fancy, had increased the admiration inspired by her personal charms.</p>
			<p>But, although this species of homage was an undoubted triumph, there was no evidence of gratified pride in the demeanor of Mabel, whose sparkling eye and intelligent smile denoted an eager interest and an animated pleasure in the conversation of a select group, of which she was the central attraction. Conscious, as she could not fail to be, of her power of pleasing, she, nevertheless, employed it without affectation or artifice; and in whatever estimation her success might be held, no one could fail to acknowledge that it was fairly won.</p>
			<p>Unwilling as Dudley was to yield allegiance to any single object, and often as he absented himself from her neighborhood, to pay his addresses elsewhere, an irresistible attraction drew him back, and a short interval only would elapse, before his clear tones would mingle again in the conversation of the little group, to which his racy and eloquent, or occasionally abrupt and ironical, contributions invariably imparted additional zest; nor did the consciousness of his vicinity fail to give an added glow to Mabel’s features, and a renewed lustre to her eye.</p>
			<p>“Do you see that magnificent girl yonder?” said an elderly painter of repute, to one whom he knew to be a lover of his art. “I will paint her picture, before the winter is over. I promise you I shall accomplish the point, and obtain a sitting. How superb she would be as Corinne crowned in the temple!”</p>
			<p>“There is talent there,” exclaimed a first-rate lawyer, significantly glancing at Mabel, with whom he had been conversing. “She has beat me in an argument, just now, good-naturedly, and without pedantry, too, and before I knew what she was at.”</p>
			<p>“I would not trust myself against her before a jury, independently of argument,” replied the gentleman to whom the remark was addressed.</p>
			<p>“Your sister is a young lady to be proud of,” said a somewhat taciturn old bachelor, who, standing near Louise, had been silently observing Mabel. “I see she is amiable, as well as agreeable, and dispenses her smiles with equal favor upon all.”</p>
			<p>“Rather too much so, I should think,” said Louise, with a short laugh, “judging from some of her friends. Pray, who is that Father Noah whom she seems to find so interesting?”</p>
			<p>“That thin gentleman in the long-bodied coat? I forget his name,⁠—a clergyman, I believe.”</p>
			<p>Louise now turned to Miss Vannecker, and exclaimed, in a low and half-confidential tone: “It is very ridiculous for Mabel to stand there, directly in the centre of the room, and talk to everybody that chooses to be introduced to her. She’ll make some most absurd acquaintances!”</p>
			<p>A little later in the evening, when Mabel was listening, in a reverential manner, to the conversation of the interesting clergyman, Louise and Miss Vannecker paused as they were crossing the room, and the former remarked abruptly to her sister: “You have chosen a conspicuous place for holding your court, this evening, my dear; the news-papers to-morrow will describe the assembly room, and say the centre ornament was a flower-piece of exquisite form, consisting of successive tiers of rose-wreaths, surmounted with a garland?”</p>
			<p>“Besides,” added Miss Vannecker, as if taking it for granted that Louise’s remark was designed to be censorious, “it is very unbecoming to stand directly beneath the gas-light.” And having thus rebuked her vanity, they passed on.</p>
			<p>Mabel blushed and looked somewhat disconcerted, but innocent of any intention at display, maintained a dignified composure, and, covering her vexation with a smile, confirmed the good opinion already formed of her by her new friend.</p>
			<p>Dudley chanced to be standing near, and overheard the rude speeches of Louise and her companion. Always courteous himself, he could not endure rudeness in others, especially when its motive was as palpable as in the present instance; for his knowledge of Louise’s character, at once suggested to his discerning mind the jealousy by which she was actuated.</p>
			<p>Anxious, therefore, to free Mabel from the slight embarrassment which he detected in spite of her assumed serenity, he availed himself of the first opportunity to invite her to visit the conservatory, which contained a choice collection of plants. Mabel, relieved by the proposal, the thoughtful delicacy of which she fully appreciated, gladly accepted his offered arm for the purpose.</p>
			<p>Dudley was just enough of a botanist and florist to make his observations upon flowers attractive and charming; he forbore the use of scientific terms, called them all by their simple and expressive names, and, without sentimentality, understood and expatiated on the poetic and touching language which they were capable of conveying.</p>
			<p>There might be minds to which these gifts of nature appealed with deeper significance, but few who could more gracefully express the gratification afforded by them to a refined sense of the beautiful.</p>
			<p>While admiring, however, his knowledge of every species of plant, including the rarest exotics, and sympathizing in most of his preferences, Mabel was astonished at his indifference to many of her favorites, especially among the common wild flowers of our fields and woods. She could not resist paying the tribute of affection to these wayside friends, and in answer to his inquiry⁠—which of all the summer blossoms she preferred? she answered frankly, “If you ask me which I love the best, I must confess, though you will wonder to hear me say so,⁠—the dandelion⁠—the friendly, yellow dandelion.”</p>
			<p>Dudley smiled incredulously.</p>
			<p>“I truly mean so,” said Mabel, earnestly; “it comes so early and stays so long. It is earth’s golden star of promise, speaking of warmth, and sunshine, and summer. It has such sweet associations, too. Why, did you never,” exclaimed she, forgetting for the moment that she was addressing the polished man of the world,⁠—“did you never sit on the grass and make long chains of the hollow stems, and sigh to think how frail they were?”</p>
			<p>“Never,” replied Dudley with decision.</p>
			<p>“Nor tear them to shreds with idle fingers, and float them in the brook to watch how they would curl? Nor pluck the downy seed-vessels, on your way from school, and blow on them three times to see if your mother wanted you?”</p>
			<p>“Never,” replied Dudley again, in a tone which intimated that his childish reminiscences included no such follies.</p>
			<p>“Then you cannot imagine,” said Mabel, her enthusiasm a little damped by his manner, “how many happy hours I associate with their common, familiar faces.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose not; but I nevertheless love flowers for the sake of association,” said Dudley; and, stooping down, he picked up a sprig of mignonette, which she had held in her hand a moment before and then thrown negligently away.</p>
			<p>Mabel blushed as she observed the action, and if at the same moment she did not feel absolutely ashamed of her love for dandelions, she was ready to confess it a childish folly, for which she had no right to expect the sympathy of grown people.</p>
			<p>In the criticism of works of art Dudley was even more skilled than in the analysis of the floral kingdom; and he next directed Mabel’s attention to a number of paintings and statues which adorned the spacious hall adjoining the conservatory. Under his tutelage Mabel had already acquired some little skill in judging of an artist’s merit, and almost fancied that she could distinguish between the works of rival schools. She was still so unsophisticated, however, as always to bestow her first thoughts on the subject, rather than the execution of a piece; and her attention was at once attracted by an ancient-looking picture, representing an angel-messenger bearing to eaven the tidings of a sinner’s repentance. The seraphic beauty of the countenance, the joy, love, and holy triumph which it depicted, inspired in Mabel an emotion of religious awe. She gazed at it a moment in silence, then turned from it to her companion, with a look which bespoke her admiration.</p>
			<p>“Miserable thing!” observed he, without appearing to notice the sentiment it had awakened in Mabel. I never can see it without smiling at the absurd discussion it has caused. You must know that my honored cousin⁠—he here lowered his voice expressively and looked over his shoulder to see if any of the family were within hearing⁠—has the vanity, or the credulity, to believe that picture a work of one of the old masters. No one, with the slightest knowledge of paintings, could cherish such a supposition for a moment. It is unquestionably a counterfeit, or at most a mere copy.”</p>
			<p>Whether copy or counterfeit it had its value, as was evident from the emotion it had awakened in Mabel; but she had no further opportunity to examine it. The seraph face having been pronounced the guilty medium of a deception, she was hurried away from it by Dudley, who assured her that it was a daub⁠—a mere imposture, not worth a moment’s study.</p>
			<p>So, also, in passing judgment on the statues. Two figures of Mercy and Truth absorbed Mabel’s notice, and were, in many respects, the finest in the collection; but Dudley could see nothing in the former but a most remarkable distortion in the little finger; and the latter, unless his eye was more incorrect than usual, betrayed a slight disproportion in the size of the throat.</p>
			<p>No one could dispute, however, the accuracy with which he pointed out the exquisite finish observable in the painting of a Dutch kitchen, the work of a celebrated artist, or the justice with which he commented upon the remarkable lightness of limb portrayed in a favorite bronze Mercury. For the true enjoyment of art, Dudley evidently considered it necessary to comprehend it in detail. He had no conception of the highest power which it is capable of exercising, restricting its influence, as he did, to the enlightened and aristocratic few, and wholly ignoring its agency in ennobling and elevating the masses.</p>
			<p>The conversation naturally passed from art to artists; and as Dudley had an intimate acquaintance with many persons of this profession, he was able to impart much curious and interesting information concerning the labors and struggles, the triumphs and failures of genius.</p>
			<p>They now occupied a position where the company, most of whom were promenading the hall, passed successively under their review; and, forsaking abstract topics, he proceeded to entertain her for some time with his comments upon various individuals⁠—their peculiar characteristics, family histories, or public services.</p>
			<p>She listened with interested and often amused attention, but at length her eye wandered to the farther end of the hall; and Dudley, observing the direction of her earnest gaze, perceived at once the object that had attracted her notice. An elderly lady, accompanied by a stout and stately military gentleman, had entered the hall at its farther extremity, and was slowly approaching the spot where they stood. She was considerably above the ordinary height of woman, with an erect and imposing figure, while her manner and bearing at once commanded respect by their composed and serene dignity. There was nothing forbidding, however, in her mild and benignant face, shaded and softened by the snowy flutings of her widow’s cap, and her features were such as must in youth have rendered her preeminently beautiful. Nor had time had power to dispossess her of personal charms, although she had numbered nearly threescore years and ten. Her skin was still fair, her eye bright, and her silver hair, which was smoothly parted on her forehead, escaped from her cap in the form of a few soft and shining curls, which hung over either cheek. Her step, too, was firm⁠—almost elastic⁠—and her hand rested lightly on the arm of the portly officer</p>
			<p>Mabel’s eye followed her with curiosity not unmixed with respectful admiration, as moving leisurely up the hall she acknowledged the courtesies of numerous friends, and at length approached the spot which Dudley had chosen as a favorable point of observation.</p>
			<p>“Here comes the salt of the earth, Miss Vaughan,” said he, in a tone of irony; she is leaning on an arm, too, of the highest respectability.”</p>
			<p>“They are a noble-looking couple,” said Mabel with warmth, at the same time turning to him with an inquiring eye, as if she would gladly hear more concerning them.</p>
			<p>“That woman,” continued Dudley, “is generallissimo of the forces of modern innovation⁠—the chief of a battalion of amazonian philanthropists who carry all before them; she will drag us before a court-martial,” exclaimed he, feigning a sudden alarm as she drew near. “How shall we escape? We shall be caught, tried, convicted, and sentenced in less than five minutes.”</p>
			<p>“She seems to carry only peaceable weapons,” said Mabel with a smile; “and allowing it were otherwise, what have we done to expose ourselves to an attack?”</p>
			<p>“We are fair subjects for it,” replied Dudley; “yourself especially. Do you not see that she is on the recruiting service?”</p>
			<p>The venerable lady of whom Dudley ventured to speak so lightly had just encountered some young girls, who were crossing the hall, and as she stood for a moment conversing with the more sprightly of the two, her hand rested tenderly on the head of the other, a slight, fair-haired creature, who looked up at her aged friend with a countenance full of affectionate respect.</p>
			<p>It had seemed to Mabel, as she saw the evident affection the old lady inspired, that nothing would delight her more than to be honored with her friendship; and although Dudley’s manner somewhat damped her enthusiasm, she could not resist watching every motion of one whose appearance seemed to rebuke ridicule.</p>
			<p>“You see,” continued he, “Madam Percival is supreme among her subalterns. Her energies are unparalleled, and her valor invariably places her in the front rank of every quixotic enterprise. She carries a current coin of golden opinions, and her credit is unlimited. It is astonishing what capital can be made now-a-days out of the sufferings of the poorer classes.”</p>
			<p>Mabel still continued silent, revolving her companions words, and waiting to hear more.</p>
			<p>“She wears the same uniform as ever, I see,” said Dudley, after a pause⁠—“black satin and brussels lace, and has the same military escort; the gentleman with her is her step-son, General Percival, of the regular army. They have appeared together on parade for these twenty years. It tells vastly well for family concord and unanimity under trying relations; I have heard, however, that there was great difficulty in settling the family estate.”</p>
			<p>Dudley lowered his voice, as he concluded, for the subject of his remarks was now within a few steps of them, and, as if in confirmation of his fears, had fixed her eye upon him intelligently.</p>
			<p>“Shall you venture to meet the charge, and be victimized?” asked Dudley, in an undertone, and at the same time looking about him, as if for a place of refuge.</p>
			<p>“I have no fears,” answered Mabel, “I am not the object of her notice.”</p>
			<p>“You will allow me, then,” said he, with ready tact, “to hand you some refreshment;” and he darted off in pursuit of a servant, who was passing with a tray of ices, thus avoiding the necessity of the apparently dreaded recognition.</p>
			<p>There was such a mingling of humor and satire throughout this conversation, that Mabel could not possibly determine whether a single word of it was spoken in earnest; nor was she convinced that Dudley’s anxiety to avoid the lady was otherwise than feigned. Still his words and conduct were not without effect, and her generous, confiding disposition was tinged with unpleasant conjectures. So impressed was she, indeed, with a suspicion of the old lady’s eccentricities, that when the latter paused directly in front of her, she was fully prepared to be addressed, without the ceremony of an introduction, and was consequently somewhat disconcerted when a person seated behind her, and whom she was unconsciously obscuring, laid a hand upon her arm and said, in a gentle voice, “I think that lady is looking for me: will you please move a little to the right?” Mabel instantly stepped aside, and as she did so, brushed against a pair of crutches, which, falling to the floor, revealed the helplessness of the object of her seeming incivility.</p>
			<p>As she stooped and restored the crutches to their owner, at the same time apologizing for her unintentional rudeness, the sincere grace of her manner called forth an approving smile from Madam Percival, who, however, took no further notice of her, but entered into conversation with the interesting lame lady, and before Dudley returned with the iced sherbet, accompanied her and <abbr>Gen.</abbr> Percival into another room.</p>
			<p>Later in the evening Mabel accepted, with her usual good nature, an invitation to join the youthful dancers, who had taken possession of the music room and wanted one more couple to complete their set. Young as she was, they were nearly all her juniors, privileged to be present on this occasion, which partook of the character of a family jubilee, and her boyish partner scarcely equalled her in height. She entered with ready glee, however, into their juvenile gaiety, and won the hearts of the youthful company by her sympathy in their enjoyment. It was an old-fashioned country dance, and Mabel, after faithfully fulfilling her part, reached the bottom laughing and out of breath.</p>
			<p>“Your dance is going off gloriously, grandmama!” exclaimed her partner, stepping gaily within the open door of an adjoining room, and addressing Madam Percival, who, while watching the progress of the dance with evident pleasure and interest, was conversing in an animated manner with the gentleman in the long-bodied coat, whom Louise had denominated Father Noah. She smiled and nodded pleasantly in acknowledgment of the boy’s congratulations; and Mabel observed that each successive couple, as they came down the dance, exchanged with her similar tokens of satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“This performance was undertaken for grandmother’s benefit,” said Mabel’s partner to her, by way of explanation. It was danced at our hostess’s wedding twenty-five years ago. My mother was bridesmaid on the occasion, and grandmother proposed the dance to-night, for the sake of old times.” As the boy named his mother he glanced affectionately towards the lady who was presiding at the piano, and Mabel, for the first time, observed that the owner of the crutches had been furnishing the youthful party with music.</p>
			<p>What a charming bond of sympathy subsists among these people, thought she; and that remarkable old lady is evidently the connecting link. Can there be hypocrisy beneath such a countenance as hers? <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley must have been joking.</p>
			<p>This latter conviction was still further strengthened in the cloak room, where she had an opportunity of witnessing the affectionate care which Madam Percival bestowed on her lame friend, declining for herself the attentions to which her years entitled her, and anxious only for the comfort of the invalid. “Offer your arm to your mother, my dear,” said she to her grandson, who came to the head of the stairs to escort them to their carriage; and General Percival not being in sight, the venerable lady herself followed, unattended.</p>
			<p>“She is a noble woman! I am sure of it,” thought Mabel, “but what could <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley have meant?”</p>
			<p>The ingenuous tribute of praise, and the intruding inquiry which followed it, were alike indicative of Mabel’s impressible character. In the former her heart spoke out, in the latter might be detected the haunting influence of an enkindled doubt. Alas, what a shadow may be flung over the fairest things by a single whisper from the brooding demon of distrust!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
