<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Oh! but ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When with rich hopes o’er fraught, the young high heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bears its first blow!⁠—it knows not yet the part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which life will teach⁠—to suffer and be still.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hemans.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>A few weeks more pass away. The gay world is as gay as ever. Music, laughter, dancing, fashion, and display, still gild the surface of that phase of humanity, which hides its throbbing heart behind the veil of conventional usages, or crushes down its aching sorrows beneath the weight of an assumed gayety. A little while ago, and Mabel was one among the crowd who wore no such veil, and bent beneath no such weight. Her motions were free, her smiles genuine, and her heart light. But the case is altered now; the immunity exists no longer; and Mabel is changed. It is not that the world has withdrawn its favor, though its admiration is, perchance, somewhat tainted with envy. It is not that her health is undermined, though the roses have paled a little in her cheeks; nor is it the effect of satiety, for the new element, which a superior mind has had power to infuse into her daily life, has lost nothing of its charm. Yet the once buoyant, happy, careless Mabel, is suddenly and strangely changed.</p>
			<p>The dull-eyed world notes it not; even affection is blinded to the fact, and scarcely does her own heart acknowledge its painful but unutterable burden.</p>
			<p>Still its influence penetrates every spring of action, and modifies every thought; for, hid as it might be from others, and struggled with as it might be by herself, Mabel, the hitherto light-hearted Mabel, has something on her mind.</p>
			<p>Whatever it may be, it is something of a saddening nature; for the spirits which were wont to be spontaneous are now forced and fitful; it is something alarming, if one may judge from the nervous starts and occasional tremblings which are significant of anxiety and dread; it is something secret, for she tells no one, maintains an assumed composure herself, and scans the faces of others with eager scrutiny.</p>
			<p>Her altered habits, moreover, betray a corresponding change in her feelings, motives, and designs. She no longer approaches the breakfast-room carolling a gay song, or trips with a light step to her aunt’s door, and bids her a lighter good morning,⁠—but pauses within her own room, listens for the footsteps of the rest of the household assembling for the morning meal, and when she makes her own appearance, glances around the table with a troubled air and an inquiring eye. And when she returns at night from those gay scenes, into which she plunges with more eagerness than ever, she seems quite forgetful of the rest which youthful weariness is wont to crave, and, dismissing her maid, paces her room with unequal steps, looks out of her window at the night, or, noiselessly turning the door-lock, moves through the house like a ghost, listening at cracks and peeping through key holes; then, startled by some slight noise, retreats hastily within her own room, perhaps brushes away a tear, and retires for the night with a lamp still burning.</p>
			<p>In society, also, many and frequent are the indications which, though unmarked by others, betray to one observant eye, at least, the secret fear which is ever present to her thoughts. The quick flush upon the countenance, the rapid and excited conversations upon subjects of trifling interest, the nervous start on being suddenly addressed, and an occasional absence of mind⁠—all bear witness to the fact, which it is now the chief anxiety of her life to conceal.</p>
			<p>Yes, even her pathway, sunny as it seemed, stretches across those dreary wastes which humanity is doomed to tread. She, like the rest, has taken up her burden, and must bear it as best she may. It came upon her suddenly. A premonitory shadow, indeed⁠—an undefined dread⁠—had once or twice taken possession of her mind; but the blow aimed by cruel hands finally struck home without preface or warning.</p>
			<p>It happened thus. She was sitting for her portrait to the very artist who had been so earnest to obtain the opportunity, and who, with Dudley’s recommendation in his favor, met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s ready encouragement.</p>
			<p>It was the morning after the fancy ball, already alluded to as in course of preparation. The festivities having been prolonged until a late hour, it was with some reluctance that Mabel made the effort to keep her appointment with the artist; but his time was valuable, and she was unwilling to disappoint him. Miss Sabiah usually accompanied her on these occasions, but as the venerable years and character of the portrait painter rendered her presence superfluous, and the coachman had taken his horses to be shod that morning, Mabel proceeded alone and on foot to the studio, requesting her aunt to send the carriage to meet her at an appointed hour.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geraldi, whose conversational gifts rivalled those of the pencil, and who seldom failed to relieve the monotony of these sittings by his agreeable discourse, had this morning enlarged with more than ordinary enthusiasm upon topics connected with his profession, and either accidentally or with conscious tact, had, by a warm eulogium upon his friend Dudley’s knowledge and taste, called up in Mabel’s face that expression of animation and interest which he was most anxious to transfer to his canvas. He had reached a critical point in his labors, and his countenance consequently manifested no little annoyance, when the outer door of his studio was unceremoniously thrown open, and a party of fashionable young ladies entered, having come thither, out of idle curiosity, to inspect some portraits which were on exhibition.</p>
			<p>A wide screen, which stretched the whole length of the apartment, concealed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geraldi and Mabel from the observation of the visitors, but their loud voices and extravagant mirth were scarcely less embarrassing to the artist than their actual presence would have been; more especially as, however he might profess to despise the criticism of the uninitiated, he could not be wholly insensible to the unqualified comments which they bestowed upon his works.</p>
			<p>“Do see,” cried one, “that is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leonard!” “Looks about as much like her as it does like me,” cried a second. “I hope she has paid him well for making a beauty of her,” again exclaimed the first speaker; while a third, exposing to view an unfinished portrait which was turned towards the wall, pronounced it a genuine likeness of Miss Oldbelle, minus her rouge and hair-dye.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geraldi smiled. Mabel blushed, recognizing as she did the voices of some of her friends, and anxiously anticipating some more cutting sarcasm.</p>
			<p>Well might she tremble⁠—but not for the artist; the poisonous shafts of these idle tongues were destined to take a nearer, closer aim, and pierce her own heart.</p>
			<p>“Where’s Mabel Vaughan?” cried Victoria Vannecker. “Geraldi is painting her; that’s the only picture I care about seeing.”</p>
			<p>“You feel a sisterly interest, Vic!” exclaimed another voice. “No wonder!” And then followed many foolish and coarse jokes, implying the near relations likely to exist between Miss Vannecker and the Vaughan family.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s lips, as she listened, curled with a slight expression of scorn at these unwelcome and preposterous projects of alliance.</p>
			<p>“I will do the Hammerlys the credit of saying,” cried the eldest and loudest-spoken of Victoria’s companions, “that there has been nothing this winter that has gone off half as well as that ball last night. The whole thing was managed splendidly, and that last dance was so exciting⁠—it almost takes me off my feet to think of it!” and she concluded by humming a few notes of the most popular waltz of the season.</p>
			<p>“They say there was no end to the champagne that was drank,” said Victoria.</p>
			<p>“I should think so,” said another and somewhat gentler voice; “did you see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Van Rosberg and that young creole that wore a Spanish dress? I was afraid they would really get to fighting. I am sure they were both excited with wine.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is nothing,” cried the loud-voiced lady. “I know from good authority, that two or three of our set didn’t go home until daylight, and then not without help. Your Knight of Malta, Vic, had his share of the champagne, if any body did.”</p>
			<p>Miss Vannecker laughed.</p>
			<p>“What were you doing in the supper-room just before the last dance? drinking healths?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Robin Hood gave the funniest toast,” said Victoria; “I wish I could remember it⁠—it was something about a horn; and Little John⁠—that was Fred Earle, you know⁠—he responded; and my Maltese Knight made a little bit of a speech⁠—all to ourselves, you know, up in that corner of the room; but oh, it was so funny! Fan and I laughed so! I declare, Fan⁠—Fan Broadhead, the fairy queen⁠—was so diverted, that she forgot to take care of her gauze wings, and that great, stout <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makeway brushed against her and crushed one of them, so that it looked ridiculously. Fan was dreadfully provoked! It served her right, though, for she never would have dreamed of taking that part if she had not known that I thought of it for myself. How mad she was when the Malta Knight said something about its proving that she was a false fairy. That was just as we went off to dance,” added Victoria, with an affected and self-satisfied air, “and I don’t know how she managed to repair the mischief.”</p>
			<p>“Your devoted knight was very light, both of head and heels, at that time in the evening,” said her friend. “What with my partner and yours, Vic, the dance had a right to be lively. They do say, though,” and here she lowered her voice sufficiently to impart added meaning to her words⁠—“the Hammerlys, and some others who have a right to know, do say, that it is not the first time that the Knight of Malta has needed the services of his father’s footman. But, lah! they say so of half the young men!”</p>
			<p>“To be sure,” said Victoria, as the party, who had long ceased their inspection of the pictures, prepared to take leave, and the door closed behind them with these words from the frivolous lips of one of their number⁠—</p>
			<p>“Poh! What is champagne made for if not to drink?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geraldi, who with his head bent over his palette had been mixing a few colors, while he impatiently awaited the departure of the talkative group of visitors, now looked up at Mabel, with the view of resuming his labors at the easel, but could scarcely believe that he saw before him the same face which he had been studying a few moments before. The mobile features had become rigid, the lips compressed, the complexion almost colorless; while the expression of animated intelligence, which he had been so anxious to retain, had wholly vanished, giving place to that vacant and absent air which often takes possession of the countenance when the mind is engaged in painful introspection.</p>
			<p>Thought was almost suspended in Mabel, but memory and imagination had called up in vivid colors a long array of living facts, upon which her mental gaze was riveted. She had experienced strange doubts and questionings before. It was all explained now. The coldness between Dudley and Harry⁠—the latter’s exaggerated attentions to Miss Vannecker⁠—his avoidance of herself⁠—her solitary return home the previous night⁠—and the unusual noise upon the stairs which had disturbed her slumbers at daybreak⁠—these idle tattlers had accounted for it all⁠—for Harry was the Knight of Malta.</p>
			<p>Not until the loud banging of the street door and the sudden silence which succeeded, recalled her to herself, did she realize the necessity for self-control. As she looked up and found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geraldi’s eyes fixed upon her, a sudden flush overspread her cheeks and brow, and she rose quickly from her chair, as if deprecating any further analysis of her face and, possibly, of her emotions.</p>
			<p>“You are fatigued, my dear youg lady. I have kept you too long!” said the kind old artist, who had heard but a portion of the conversation that had just transpired in his studio, and who had recognized nothing in it which could have power to agitate her.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Mabel, in a broken voice, and scarcely knowing what she said, “I will go now;” and rising, she mechanically resumed her cloak and bonnet, and walked to the door, forgetting, until she had nearly left the room, her customary salutation and farewell, which were at length performed with but little of her wonted grace.</p>
			<p>She had gained the sidewalk before she even thought of the carriage, but then perceiving that it had not arrived, she walked slowly up the street, and turning, walked back for a little distance,⁠—and this she did, again and again, unconscious of observation, and thankful only to be in the fresh air and alone.</p>
			<p>“Miss Mabel!” called Donald, as she was unconsciously passing the carriage, which had at length reached the artist’s door. He was obliged to follow his young mistress and repeat the call, before he could arrest her attention.</p>
			<p>“O, Donald! is that you?” she exclaimed, in sudden surprise; and then, without any explanation of her singular preoccupation, she turned, hastened to the carriage, and springing in, threw herself upon the back seat with evident relief, and told him to drive on.</p>
			<p>“Where?” asked he, and receiving no answer, repeated the question.</p>
			<p>“Home,” cried she, at length, in answer to his inquiries, and for the first time astonishing him by the irritability of her tone of voice.</p>
			<p>Fortunately it was a quiet street, and there was no one but Donald to feel or express any astonishment at her movements.</p>
			<p>They had gone but a few steps, when she suddenly pulled the check-string. “Drive to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s!” exclaimed she, a little imperatively, as if the man had wilfully misunderstood her first direction.</p>
			<p>Poor girl! she scarcely knew what she said or did. Louise was at home, and Mabel found her attired in a rich dressing-gown, and lying on a sofa, too much fatigued with the dissipation of the previous evening to attempt any exertion.</p>
			<p>Not till she was seated opposite to her sister, and a pause succeeded the usual interchange of civilities, did Mabel ask herself for what purpose she had come. Certainly not to betray to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy the subject which was uppermost in her thoughts. Perhaps, though she could not herself be sure, it was to learn whether Louise was yet conscious of the fatal secret, which was no secret; and if so, to discover the nature of her sentiments in relation to the melancholy fact.</p>
			<p>“Been at Geraldi’s ever since ten o’clock?” was the exclamation with which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy broke the momentary silence. “O, Mabel,” continued she, languidly, and settling herself more comfortably on her pillows, “how strong you are; why, I hardly felt able to go to the breakfast-table, after the fatigue of last night.”</p>
			<p>“You danced more than I did,” said Mabel with an absent tone, and the half-timid, half-searching glance at her sister, which she had worn from her first entrance.</p>
			<p>“Yes, very true,” responded Louise, with the flattered air of a youthful belle, “somehow I never can get excused. How do you manage, Mabel? However,” continued she, without waiting for a reply, “you are not so passionately fond of it as I am; I was brought up to it. I danced the cracovienne with castanets, when I was only four years old, for the entertainment of mamma’s visitors. There was a Count in the room one evening,⁠—I can’t think of his name, but I remember perfectly what he said to me about my dancing.”</p>
			<p>Once launched upon this topic, Louise did not pause until she had detailed, for Mabel’s benefit, the successive tributes of flattery which had poisoned the ear, first of the child, and then of the woman, up to the present period; and Mabel, to whom these petty parades of vanity were nothing new, breathed more freely as she listened. She could never be thinking of herself, and of such trifles, if she knew what I know, thought Mabel; and she felt a sense of relief in the idea that there was one of the family, at least, who was ignorant of Harry’s disgrace.</p>
			<p>At length, after Louise had roamed from one frivolous topic to another, for the space of half an hour, failing amid her own volubility to take note of Mabel’s unusual silence and constraint, the latter rose to go.</p>
			<p>“Do hand me that cologne, Mabel,” said her sister; and receiving the bottle from Mabel’s hand, she poured some of its contents on her handkerchief, and applied it to her forehead. “I believe I have got a headache to-day,” drawled she, “I feel very dull and stupid, at any rate; I suppose it’s the champagne I drank last night. Close the shutters, will you, Mabel? if Lydia will only keep those children out, I may get a nap. Was Harry up to breakfast this morning?” added she, laughing.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s hand trembled, as with her back to Louise, she attempted to close the shutters, and her voice betrayed no slight agitation, as she answered, “Why?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, nothing,” replied Louise, “only I fancy he returned rather late, and had a pretty heavy dose to sleep off.”</p>
			<p>Mabel made no answer, except by rattling the latch of the shutter, which she tried in vain to fasten.</p>
			<p>“It was two o’clock when we came away,” continued Louise, “and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy says that some of the young men in the hotel did not come home until three or four hours later. I will venture to say, Harry was one of the last to leave, for nobody seemed to enjoy it more than he did. I never saw him in such spirits in his life⁠—thanks to the supper, I think, rather than Vic Vannecker’s wit, though Vic would not thank me for saying so,” added she, in a somewhat indifferent tone.</p>
			<p>Mabel turned slowly round, lifted her long lashes, and fixed her eyes full and wonderingly upon her sister’s face. Louise met this glance of deep concern and reproach with her usual light and scornful laugh.</p>
			<p>“Don’t look so shocked,” exclaimed she at length, a little irritated by Mabel’s silence, which was far more expressive than any words of which she could have made use; “you are just like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy. He talks about Harry’s having got into a bad set, and all that nonsense. I am sure his acquaintances are the first young men about town. For my part, I like to see gentlemen have a little life and spirit about them; I can’t bear these spoonies who are always measuring their conduct; afraid of losing caste among the saints; they don’t turn out a bit better in the end. But, la, Mabel, how solemn you look,” added Louise, almost angrily. “You’d make an anchorite of Harry, I dare say, and advise me to become a nun, and go out into the wilderness, next month, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, as he proposed I should do this morning. My motto is, to enjoy as much as one can, and take life easy.” And once more composing herself upon her couch, she commenced putting her motto into practice by closing her eyes for a nap.</p>
			<p>Mabel was not slow to avail herself of the hint which this action afforded, and now hastening from the house, gave the Coachman the unhesitating order to drive home.</p>
			<p>In that one long, silent look which she had fastened upon her sister’s face, she had pierced, as it were, to the depths of that shallow and worldly nature,⁠—she had measured the wide difference between her own vehement heart-throbs, and the feeble pulsations of feeling in Louise, and had learned the sad truth, that in the deep experiences of life she must seek in vain, in this direction, for a sister’s counsel and sympathy.</p>
			<p>To whom, then, shall she look for comfort in this hour of bitterness? Not to her father, who, she trusts, may long be left in ignorance of his son’s misconduct; not to her aunt, who would inveigh against it with a severity of which Mabel could not bear to think; and of higher and heavenly aid, though she was far from denying its power, she had not yet learned to avail herself. So, for the first time in her life, as she sought her solitary room, she felt herself truly alone,⁠—alone with an aching sorrow.</p>
			<p>With what crushing force did it weigh down and paralyze her heart! The world might excuse the folly at which it laughed so lightly, the frivolous might defend, and the weak applaud, but Mabel could only tremble and weep.</p>
			<p>She looked not to the end, she measured not the fearful consequences that might ensue in the future; her feelings had received too severe a shock to admit of any other consciousness, than that of a deep and irreparable calamity.</p>
			<p>Harry, her noble brother, a laughing stock and a by-word!⁠—his manly figure and handsome face a mark for the finger of scorn, his intellectual nature lowered to the level of a brute! It was too much; and the necessity for self-control being past, she threw herself on her bed, and gave way to a paroxysm of grief.</p>
			<p>Who shall tell the agony of the mental conflict that she experienced? It is sufficient that she rose from that suffering crisis a new and altered being. The iron hand was upon her which moulds the child into the woman, and she went her way, shrinking beneath its cruel touch. Henceforth, her inner and outer world were no longer in harmony. The drama of her life was double, and she had two parts to play.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
