<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O changing child and woman,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hadst not second sight!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or bending down thy forehead white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The human to the human,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The idol’s shadow would have made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its light to vanish like a shade.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Browning.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Mabel returned to her dressing-room, threw herself into a seat at the open window, and, with her hands dropped listlessly on her lap, and her eyes gazing vacantly into a piece of blue sky opposite, became lost in thought.</p>
			<p>“So, Dudley thinks me a complete fashionist, a mere worldling,” was her inward meditation. “Who has had such an opportunity of knowing me as he has? To whom have I confided my thoughts, hopes, and aspirations, so freely as to him? and, can he have thus misunderstood me? Can he really believe me the cold, calculating, mercenary creature, whom he professes to despise? How unjust! how cruel! Is it my fault that I move in a circle of fashion? Is it anything but the accident of my lot that placed me here? Are my views, motions, actions, all to be measured by the standard of my frivolous acquaintances? I did not choose them, they were chosen for me, and I only play my part in the sphere assigned by nature. These fine clothes,” thought she, as rising impatiently from her seat, her eyes fell on the rich silks and laces which were profusely scattered around, “do I want them? do I care for them? Are they not the mere accompaniments of my present position? This face and figure which the world calls beautiful,” and she paused before the mirror, “do I covet beauty, save as it may make me attractive in his eyes? He must know⁠—he does know, that all else may frown and I care not, so he only smiles. He talks of sacrifice, and yet believes that I would crush my heart down rather than relinquish the prospect of a brilliant establishment. Ah, which would be the greater sacrifice? He does not know the power of a woman’s love. I knew he despised others, but I never dreamed that he had no faith in me.”</p>
			<p>Ah! that was a bitter pang indeed, that he should place her thus on a level with the vain crowds, at whom she had so often heard him sneer. Poor child! She had trusted, with all the warmth of her generous affections, in one who knew not what it was to trust. The poisoned arrows, with which she had thoughtlessly played, had rebounded and pierced her to the heart. No wonder that she smarted at the sudden wound.</p>
			<p>But her generous confidence was not weary yet, and the first struggle with injured feeling being past, she was ready, with a true woman’s inventive charity, both to palliate the offence, and excuse and pardon the offender.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker dislikes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley,” thought she, “and has no doubt given her own coloring to his words;⁠—things sound so differently when repeated;⁠—besides, she says he is poor,⁠—I never thought of that. He can not be poor, and his talents would be priceless in any profession; but in comparison with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston’s, his present means, perhaps, are limited.” And Mabel’s heart softened as she reflected on the bitterness which a sensitive man might feel, as he contrasted his narrow estate with the princely fortune of his rival. “I have been careless and imprudent, too,” thought she; “no wonder he is vexed, when strangers even are deceived.” And here Mabel called to mind the frequent instances, unexplained till now, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley had turned coldly away at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston’s approach, or, with harsh and cutting sarcasm, had commented on the frivolous tastes and manners of the amiable and harmless young man.</p>
			<p>“I must be more careful in future,” thought she. “For my own sake, and the sake of the world’s opinion, I shall be circumspect, and he shall never again have cause to feel vexed with me on this point.</p>
			<p>“And so he believed me dazzled by the prospect of a brilliant fortune; and is that so very strange? it has blinded many a better girl than I. What should he know of my actual tastes, my love of simplicity, my hatred of display? He has seen me only surrounded by the trappings of wealth, and the object of the greatest flattery. Can he picture me as I was in my country home at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s? or imagine with what joy I should shake off the fetters and chains of this artificial life, and devote myself to the sweet and welcome tasks which constitute the comfort of a domestic fireside? I have been unjust to myself and to him; I have appeared before him only in a false character, and yet I expect him to believe me true. Henceforward he shall know me as I am.”</p>
			<p>Thus, by a process of reasoning, in which the heart, and not the head, furnished arguments, Mabel had finally arrived at a conclusion which left her, as she believed, still mistress of her own destiny. She had but to exercise the frankness, simplicity, and truth, which were her own native characteristics, and, with the knowledge she had obtained of Dudley’s sensitive distrust, she should have no difficulty in removing it.</p>
			<p>More precious than ever now seemed the opportunity afforded by the approaching journey! We have seen with what fond and romantic anticipations she had already looked forward to the escape from city thraldom, to the enjoyment of a few weeks commune with nature, and with one whom she deemed nature’s fit interpreter, but now this long-talked-of excursion had suddenly assumed a new significance, a vital interest; it had become, as it were, the crisis of her life.</p>
			<p>“No need of all this finery,” thought she, as she hastily folded and put out of sight the offending articles of dress, the nervous trembling of her busy fingers keeping time to the impatient fluttering of the young heart yearning for an occasion to prove the genuineness of its devotion. “Travelling furnishes no necessity for elaborate toilettes,” was her exulting reflection; “it imposes none of the restrictions of city life. For a while, at least, I can act myself, and be happy in the way I love best.”</p>
			<p>And how were these sentiments responded to by the man for whose sake this devoted young heart would have deemed nothing a sacrifice? Was this ready self-consecration met with corresponding zeal?</p>
			<p>Alas! <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker⁠—manœuvering, gossiping, worldly woman though she was⁠—had spoken some homely truths. The cold, calculating, selfish Dudley well deserved the name of hypocrite,⁠—for who is a greater hypocrite than he who stamps another as a coward, while he himself is ready to play the poltroon. He had dared to question Mabel’s disinterestedness and capability of self-sacrifice; could his own soul have denied the truth, that he himself was guilty of the very weakness he contemned in another? <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker had proclaimed his want of confidence in the woman he professed to love, but this was but half the truth; for truer, sadder, more fatal still⁠—he had no confidence in himself, the idol whom he loved supremely.</p>
			<p>Thus, while seeing more plainly than Mabel did the obstacles to their union, unlike her he felt no generous ardor to overleap them at a bound. It was true her habits were expensive, but so too were his, and confirmed by long indulgence. The whole of his moderate income was but just sufficient for his selfish wants; was there, then, anything to spare? He knew very well that only by a strenuous and manly exercise of his talents and gifts, only by entering heart and hand into the contest with fortune, could he achieve such a position of usefulness and honor as would bring with it the pecuniary independence which he lacked. And for this he had neither the energy, the will, nor, above all, the faith; faith in his own powers of persevering endeavor,⁠—faith in noble purpose, and in the providence which is sure to reward well directed effort with success.</p>
			<p>What! forego his wayward journeyings, desultory studies, and artistic pursuits, and, plunging into the vortex of busy life, task all his powers to win for himself a place among earnest men! His self-indulgent sensitiveness recoiled from the idea. Abandon the refined circles of conventional society, forego the privilege of intellectual opportunity, and relinquish the luxurious ease of a bachelor’s establishment, for the seclusion, the privations, and the every day responsibilities of domestic life! His aristocratic and fastidious nature spurned the thought.</p>
			<p>“A few weeks more within the sphere of pretty Mabel’s smiles,” was his reflection, as whiling away the warm hours of the day, stretched on a couch in an apartment at his club, he lazily watched the blue curling smoke of his cigar⁠—“a journey to the Falls in company with this interesting and beautiful young enthusiast, and then,”⁠—he sighed,⁠—for he would have loved Mabel, had there been room in his heart for so disinterested an emotion. “Well⁠—ah, well! each season brings with it its pleasures and its claims. A trip to the Sandwich Islands next, perhaps,⁠—they say the climate is unsurpassed.”</p>
			<p>Had there been an electric communication between his heart and Mabel’s, her airy castles of bliss would have fallen as beneath the lightning blast; but there was no such magnetic link, and she went dreaming on.</p>
			<p>She was still occupied with her own glowing and painfully exciting meditations, when her solitude was suddenly broken in upon by one, who of late seldom intruded within her precincts.</p>
			<p>It was Harry. He came in, heated with exercise, and there was something of the ease and freedom of his old manner in the unconcerned air with which he stretched himself on his sister’s comfortable sofa, and wiped the moisture from his brow.</p>
			<p>“It is very warm,” said Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Confounded hot,” replied Harry, taking up the fan <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker had been using. “I never knew such weather in May before. I believe you’ve got the coolest place in the house, though.”</p>
			<p>There was a pause; the subject of the weather exhausted, this brother and sister, once so confiding, were at a loss for anything to say.</p>
			<p>After a few moments, however, Harry broke at once the silence and constraint with the abrupt remark, “So we are to have a new character in the family.” Mabel colored and experienced a nervous tremor; she feared the remark had some reference to herself. She was reässured on this point, however, as Harry continued in a tone of half-playful, half-indignant irony, “Yes, nothing less than a lawyer,⁠—a rusty, fusty lawyer. It is all cut and dried, without the slightest reference to the principal party concerned; old Judge Paradox’s office in L. is, I am told, the mint in which I am to be coined into a legal instrument;” and Harry laughed a bitter laugh.</p>
			<p>Mabel made no reply to this communication; she felt reluctant to acknowledge to Harry that she had already learned the tidings from her father.</p>
			<p>Harry, evidently engaged in some mental process, uttered at intervals an exclamation of angry scorn, then at length gave further vent to his feelings in the sudden outbreak;⁠—“A pretty piece of business! a ridiculous farce! to undertake to treat a man as if he were still a boy! Though a boy, even, if he had any spirit, would object, I think, to being disposed of in this way!”</p>
			<p>Mabel now understood that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s arrangements had been made without Harry’s knowledge, or the slightest reference to his wishes, and her quick mind saw at once the probable consequences of this injudicious step. She knew how vain it was to endeavor thus to control the youth, who never, from his infancy, had submitted to restraint.</p>
			<p>As if to give plausibility to the scheme, however, she remarked,⁠—“But, Harry, you always preferred that profession; I always supposed you would decide upon it.”</p>
			<p>“What if I did,” said Harry, sharply. “Is this the season of the year to commence a dry study; and is the atmosphere of L. likely to awaken a man’s ambition? No, my father is much mistaken if he thinks I shall put myself under the government of an antediluvian judge, or be tied to the apron strings of two old women. You can take up your residence with the aunties if you choose, and sit between them all day, learning the art of stocking-knitting; but as for me, I can assure you, my imagination takes a higher flight.” And as he finished speaking, he compressed his lips, and threw his head back on the sofa cushions with an air of resolution not to be mistaken.</p>
			<p>“But, Harry,” exclaimed Mabel, “think how you will disappoint father. I have no doubt his arrangements with his old friend are all completed.” Her conscience smote her as she spoke. Was it for her to remind her brother of his duty? Had she not also been included in her father’s plans, and had she not in like manner proved refractory?</p>
			<p>“Look well to your diplomacy, then,” said Harry. “I shall charge you with a commission to his old friend, and trust to you to execute it faithfully. Tell him that the air of his neighborhood does not suit my constitution,⁠—that I feel myself called upon to try a different climate,⁠—that I have a great repugnance to being buried in L. You start next week, I suppose, on your enviable visit?”</p>
			<p>“Mine?” asked Mabel, with evident embarrassment. “What, my visit to my aunt Margaret?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly; have you not yet been informed of your agreeable destiny?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—no,” said Mabel with hesitation; “at least, I mean⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You don’t mean to back out, I hope,” said Harry, drawing down the corners of his mouth, and speaking in a tone of mock reproof.</p>
			<p>With mortification and difficulty, Mabel faltered out the words, “Why⁠—it happened so, that I was thinking of another journey just at this time, and I concluded that⁠—that⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That the air of L. would not suit you,” said Harry, with emphasis, and a meaning laugh; and here he precisely echoed her tones of a moment before,⁠—“think how you will disappoint father.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but it does not matter so much where I go,” said Mabel, anxious to excuse herself.</p>
			<p>Harry would listen to no such excuse, however. Her self-indulgence and opposition to their father had, for the present, placed her precisely upon his own level. He rallied her upon her hypocritical attempt to awaken his filial sentiments, congratulated her upon her escape from parental thraldom, and on the strength of the kindred tie established by their mutual rebellion, so far resumed his brotherly right to her confidence as to inquire into the nature of the trip she had in view, and the expected companions of the journey.</p>
			<p>Mabel sketched the plan of the tour, and enumerated the party, closing with the name of Lincoln Dudley.</p>
			<p>At the last utterance, Harry’s only comment was an audible “pshaw!” which Mabel well understood; for she had become instinctively conscious that the friendship once existing between her brother and Dudley had given place to something less than indifference.</p>
			<p>Harry had risen from his recumbent posture on the sofa, and stood apparently surveying a picture which hung on the wall, but there was a bitterness in his expression that could scarcely have been called up by the subject represented on the canvas.</p>
			<p>“If you don’t go to L.,” said Mabel, diffidently, and with painful hesitation, “you had better go with us.”</p>
			<p>“I!” exclaimed Harry, turning upon her almost fiercely⁠—“not I. I certainly should start for L. at once, if joining that party were the only alternative;” and, with these words, he abruptly turned on his heel and left the room.</p>
			<p>Once more alone, Mabel would gladly have resumed her castle building⁠—but in vain; flattering visions might dazzle and bewilder her, but she no longer dared unhesitatingly pursue them. There was a something which held her back. Never had the simple voice of duty asserted itself with such force as now. It seemed to whisper in stern and solemn tones, “Child of earth, beware! thy pathway here divides; thou art free to turn either to the right hand or the left, but thou canst not act for thyself alone. Perhaps thy choice may involve thine aged father’s peace, and determine the ruin or reformation of thy brother. Mark then, and choose aright.”</p>
			<p>It haunted her until nightfall. It robbed her of her earlier hours of sleep, it mingled in her later dreams, it greeted her at the morning light,⁠—and still she refused to listen.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
