<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>The ear inclined to every voice of grief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hand that oped spontaneous to relief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heart, whose impulse stay’d not for the mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To freeze to doubt what charity enjoin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sprang to man’s warm instinct for mankind.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>New Timon.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“Have you seen her, Uncle Bayard? tell me, have you?” eagerly exclaimed the animated sixteen-year-old girl, who was seated in the carriage of the member of Congress on the day when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway proclaimed the expected arrival of her guests. This earnest remark was addressed to a tall young man, with a broad forehead, and singularly frank and noble countenance, whom the little fairy had joined, on the evening of the party at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood’s house, and playfully caught by the arm while she put the important question.</p>
			<p>“Seen who?” asked the gentleman, with a smile which betrayed that he knew very well whom she meant. “Seen who?” repeated the girl with a mocking air. “Oh, now, Uncle Bayard, you needn’t pretend; I saw you watching her for as much as five minutes; so tell me, what do you think of her?”</p>
			<p>“What ought I to think of her? come, teach me my lesson again, puss,” said the young man, evading a direct reply.</p>
			<p>“Ah! you needn’t ask me, said the pretty little miss, looking archly up into his face. “You have been studying at the fountain head; I saw you in the looking-glass, and you never took your eyes off her for five,⁠—yes, for ten minutes.”</p>
			<p>“And what was the result? Did you see my thoughts reflected in the mirror too?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,⁠—pretty clearly; you thought her the most beautiful, elegant, magnificent creature that ever you beheld in your life;⁠—if you didn’t, I’ll never forgive you. Now tell me,” continued she coaxingly, “isn’t she splendid?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Bessie, and so is an iceberg.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, what a cruel, wicked, unjust comparison!” exclaimed the enthusiastic Bessie, resentfully flinging away the hand which in her earnestness she had a moment before affectionately clasped. “You would not say so if you knew her. She is as pleasant and charming as she is beautiful.”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t know her on any account,” persisted the provoking Bayard.</p>
			<p>“Now why not?” challenged Bessie, throwing back her head with a defiant air.</p>
			<p>“I should be afraid of a chill,” and he feigned a slight shudder, as if he suddenly felt a current of cold air.</p>
			<p>“It is enough to give one a chill to hear you talk,” retorted beauty’s champion, with spirit. “You don’t deserve to get acquainted with her, and I almost hope you won’t have a chance. I won’t introduce you.”</p>
			<p>“A charitable resolution,” responded her youthful uncle. I cannot conceive of a greater danger than being brought into collision with that brilliant”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Stop! stop! don’t you speak that word again,” cried Bessie, trying to reach his lips with her little hand.</p>
			<p>The tall young man threw back his head, to escape this check upon his freedom of speech, and laughingly continued⁠—“I am ready to admire her to your heart’s content, Bessie,⁠—only at a distance, mind.”</p>
			<p>“Fie, uncle, what a coward!”</p>
			<p>“True enough, little Bess, I plead guilty to the charge,” said Bayard, assuming a more serious tone than that in which the dialogue had hitherto been conducted. “A man living as I do, where life is plain, simple, and robbed of all conventionalities, learns to love, esteem, and reverence, to the last degree, a warm-hearted, true, devoted woman, one who can quite forget herself in the glow of her zeal for another, as a little friend of mine has done to-night;⁠—but, Bessie, if I read her face aright, this Miss Vaughan of yours is cold, proud, and self-confident. I confess I am afraid of such a woman.”</p>
			<p>“O uncle! her smile is bewitching and her manners are full of warmth,” exclaimed Bessie.</p>
			<p>“But the smile seems to come by rule, and her manners are too studied to be attractive. All the graces in the world will not compensate for the want of natural cheerfulness and simple”⁠—He here checked himself abruptly, as Bessie put up her finger in a warning manner. This time she was evidently in earnest, and a slight rustling movement in the immediate vicinity of the speaker likewise recommended a caution, which had, however, come too late to save the embarrassment which ensued.</p>
			<p>The conversation had taken place in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood’s library, which chanced to be vacated at the moment by the crowd of visitors which thronged the hall and parlors, and the parties engaged in it had been quite oblivious of the fact, that, standing as they did close to the open folding-doors which led thence into one of the drawing-rooms, every word of their animated dispute could be distinctly heard by any person standing on the other side of the partition. Weary with the unsuccessful effort to rally her wounded and agitated spirits, Mabel had a moment before sought refuge in a recess formed by a projecting mantel piece and the partition wall of the library, and, while ostensibly endeavoring to make the acquaintance of a child permitted to sit up beyond its usual bed-time, she was striving to collect and refresh her scattered senses, and already exhausted powers. It may well be believed that she was but little aided in the effort by the above dialogue, every word of which reached her ears, though until her name was spoken at its close, she had no suspicion to whom it referred. Like a hunted deer, which in seeking a place of rest only finds itself the subject of new and painful embarassments, she started, and without looking in the direction of the voices, crossed with a quick step to the other extremity of the well-filled room, thus putting a little throng of people between herself and the unwary speakers. She had recognized Bessie’s lively tones, but those of her uncle were unfamiliar; and having gained the shelter of the crowd, the impulse was irresistible to look back and discover who it might be who had judged her with so much severity. She had crossed the room in such a direction that she would have been enabled to do this, had Bayard retained his former position, but a like impulse had led him to step within the archway of the folding-doors; and as she timidly lifted her face, suffused as it was with a deep and burning blush, she met the clear, blue, honest eye of the young man fixed full upon her, and her own dropped again instinctively, while her agitation visibly increased as she thus encountered his gaze and felt that her quick movement was understood and appreciated.</p>
			<p>Had his good heart experienced anything but pain and regret at his censorious words having been thus overheard, the latter emotions would have been at once excited by the patient, deprecating, reproachful glance of the misjudged and sensitive girl. There was no proud contempt, no haughty defiance in the gentle drooping of the head, the painful blush which overspread her cheeks and brow on thus hearing herself condemned for emotions the very reverse of those by which she was in reality actuated; there was no shade of anger in the countenance which expressed hurt and wounded, but not bitter or resentful, feelings.</p>
			<p>“O Uncle Bayard,” exclaimed Bessie, as soon as she could recover from her consternation, “she has heard every word!”</p>
			<p>“She must have,” said Bayard, in a tone which indicated his regret.</p>
			<p>The good-natured Bessie forbore to reproach him, though feeling scarcely less grieved than Mabel herself. She experienced a partial triumph, however, when the young man, after following with his eyes the object of his remarks, and watching the quick blood mount to her temples, turned to his little niece and said, “Bessie, she has convinced me, where you have failed. I yield the point, and stand convicted; she is not an iceberg.”</p>
			<p>It was the concession of a candid, truth-loving mind, but Mabel, unfortunately, could not have the benefit of it, and was left, as many have been under like circumstances, to the stinging consciousness that a burdened, humiliated, anxious heart, while seeking to hide its oppressive secrets from the unsympathizing eye of the world, too frequently lays itself open to misconstruction and undeserved reproach. But it was some consolation to believe, that, except in one unguarded moment, she had successfully feigned a composure which she did not feel, and this thought once more restoring her to apparent calmness, she continued to measure out her words and smiles, which Bayard, with no little discrimination, had discovered to be artificial and forced. It was a relief, however, when music was proposed, and all save the performers were permitted to relapse into silence.</p>
			<p>There were several fine voices among the company, and some popular glees being called for, Mabel readily consented to preside at the piano, and furnish the accompaniment, a difficult accomplishment for one who does not take part in the singing; but, although diffident in respect to her vocal powers, she had an exquisite ear for music, and this had always at school been her disinterested province.</p>
			<p>Satisfied with an office which, to one so familiar with it, involved little more than a mechanical effort, and soothed and cheered by the sound of Harry’s fine bass voice, which she rejoiced to hear, lending depth to the song, she played a long time without consciousness of fatigue, and finally received, with much of her natural sweetness and grace, the thanks of the group who were assembled around the piano. She still occupied the music-stool, and was engaged in conversation with the senior <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bloodgood, who stood beside her, when she suddenly became conscious that some one was waiting to take her place at the instrument, and looking quickly up, she recognized the individual, who, a little while ago, had made her the subject of his criticism.</p>
			<p>Perhaps, as she promptly vacated the place and withdrew outside the circle, he was reminded of the dread he had expressed of her vicinity. If so, however, it must have been his conscience rather than her manner which so reminded him, for she returned his gentlemanly acknowledgement of her rising with a graceful courtesy, and there was nothing marked or rude in her quietly retreating to a distance.</p>
			<p>As the instrument was so situated that the performer faced the company, and she dreaded the embarrassment of again meeting his eye, she purposely strolled through the back parlor into the library, leaning on the arm of her obliging host, who was soon after summoned away by a servant. Thus left alone among strangers, she could not resist listening with pleasure to the slow, impressive, and beautiful symphony which proceeded from the piano, and was inwardly commenting on the taste and skill of the performer, when he suddenly commenced singing; and, as a lull among the company immediately succeeded, the rich, mellow notes of his voice fell upon her ear, the effect seemingly unmarred by distance.</p>
			<p>Never before had Mabel heard such music. It was true her enjoyment of the art had been limited, but a far wider experience might well have failed to awaken such impressions as those which were inspired by the strains of this gifted singer. His voice, of great natural breadth and sweetness, possessed, also, the advantage of the highest cultivation, and these qualities were enhanced and their effect heightened in no slight degree by the purity of his enunciation and the expressive power and pathos which he imparted to the words. It was eloquence married unto harmony. He now sang, by request, a glorious air from Rossini’s “<span epub:type="se:name.music">Stabat Mater</span>,” and the effect of the sublime music was evident in the hush which prevailed throughout the rooms, and the strained and eager attention of those even who were not ordinarily susceptible to emotion from a similar source. Though the clear, full notes penetrated through all the lower apartments of the house, Mabel found herself instinctively drawn in the direction whence they proceeded, as if to make sure that they did not have their source in some illusion of the senses, and, half forgetting, wholly disregarding her previous desire to avoid the presence of the young stranger, she noiselessly but unhesitatingly glided through the hall and stationed herself among a little throng of listeners, in the doorway opposite the piano. She had not dared to scan his face attentively before; now she could not resist doing so, nor could she fail to acknowledge that it was a countenance worthy of the inspired song,⁠—a countenance in which gentleness and force were most harmoniously blended. He might have been five and twenty years of age, though the freshness and fairness of his complexion gave him a more youthful appearance. He wore no beard, and his light, wavy hair was tossed back in some careless fashion, revealing a finely developed and intellectual brow; his full, blue eye was calm, clear, and truthful, and all his features were indicative of resolution and energy. His unusual heighth and breadth of figure, his well expanded chest, and firm, erect position, were all significant, moreover, of physical power and endurance; in short, his whole appearance might be pronounced typical of those ancient northern races, noted both for beauty and hardihood. In proof of this, Mabel was forcibly reminded by his striking exterior, of a picture she had once seen representing some youthful Norsemen of the times of Hengist and Horsa, to one figure in which group she detected in him a marked resemblance.</p>
			<p>It added not a little to the effect produced by his music that he sang with no apparent effort, and seemed quite unconscious of the impression produced upon his audience, while the half smile upon his face indicated the joyousness with which he thus gave vent, as it were, to the natural emotions of his soul; and when he at length finished and rose from his seat amid the breathless silence of the assembly, there was not the slightest evidence of triumph in his manner; but receiving without affectation the plaudits of those in his neighborhood, and declining to reseat himself at the instrument, he entered, with respectful earnestness, into conversation with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood’s father. The latter, an extremely elderly gentleman, appeared to be questioning him with interest, and listening with attention to his animated replies; while the youngest child of the household, who had leaned against him, looking up in his face while he sang, continued in the same trusting attitude, and suffered him to toss her silken curls with his hand; his relation to both being significant of his rare and beautiful character; for noble firmness of heart and will was in him so united with gentle and cheerful benignity, that he was one whom old men might reverence, and little children love.</p>
			<p>Though Mabel might be excused for terming the neighborhood of L. a country district, in comparison with New York, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway was right in asserting that no one could entertain company more elegantly than their Member of Congress; and she might also have added, with truth, that no city could furnish a choicer collection of guests than would be sure to assemble at his house. All the most cultivated families for ten miles around were represented, men of political note were present from a still greater distance, and pretty girls and gay young collegians made the time pass merrily; while no pains were spared on the part of the host to render the occasion a memorable one. The beautifully decorated supper-room had been thrown open from the commencement of the evening; and from the moment supper was announced until the company left the house, it was more or less frequented. During the latter portion of the time, however, it was almost exclusively occupied by gentlemen, who, after devoting themselves assiduously to the ladies in the first instance, returned thither to partake of the second course of hot oysters, and drink each other’s health with more freedom than they had ventured upon in the presence of their mothers, daughters, and wives. It was with trembling heart that, towards the close of the evening, Mabel lingered near the door of this room, vainly hoping to attract Harry’s attention and, under the plea of a long drive, persuade him to return home. He stood directly opposite to her, but the supper-table was between them, and in the increasing hilarity which prevailed she found it impossible to catch his eye, while every moment of delay rendered it more doubtful whether he would regard a sister’s summons. Several of her acquaintances passed and re-passed, and more than one invited her to return to the drawing-room; but she persisted in declining, remarking that she found it cooler in the hall. Now and then a loud peal of laughter rang through her ears like a sudden pain, while the rapid uncorking of fresh bottles of wine caused a nervous shudder to agitate her whole frame. In the midst of a circle of thoughtless young men stood Harry,⁠—no, not Harry,⁠—but the strange, unnatural being that Harry became, when no longer master of himself. The light joke was passing from lip to lip, and each had his foaming glass raised awaiting the coming toast, when Bayard, approaching with a quick step from the drawing-room, passed Mabel without observing her, and stepping to the table took from it a tumbler and a pitcher, which proved to be empty.</p>
			<p>“Ah, Lewis!” exclaimed he, to a man-servant who stood near, and whom he evidently knew, “there is no water here; I want a glass of water for Miss Bessie.”</p>
			<p>The servant took the pitcher to replenish it, and, during the instant of delay which ensued, the young man stood gazing at the convivial group opposite to him, with a serious, contemplative face, which had in it, however, less of contempt than anxiety and commiseration. As the servant presently handed him the glass of water and he started to leave the room, he was followed by two or three of the noisiest of the youths, who, passing through the door-way at the same moment as himself, were heard to say to one another, “Fred has bet with that young New York chap, as to which will drink the most champagne, and Bloodgood is to stand umpire. Fred has beat already; New York is making a fool of himself. I am going to hand my mother into her carriage and then come back and see the sport.” At the same moment the voice of Harry within the room boisterously exclaimed,⁠—“Look here, waiter! bring on some more wine.”</p>
			<p>In the hurry and excitement of their movements, one of the reckless youths who passed through the door at the same moment with Bayard, roughly jostled the arm of the latter, causing a large proportion of the water which he carried to be suddenly spilled on the dress and arm of Mabel, who stood, as we have said, just within the hall. He turned quickly to apologize for the accident; but the words died on his lips as he recognized her and observed the expression of her countenance, realizing as he did, at the same moment, the painfulness of her situation. Her face was deathly pale, her colorless lips were tightly compressed, and her hand nervously clasped the railing of a hat-tree which was within her reach; while the intense suffering which was written on her features, the earnest, pleading, and half-bewildered look with which she met the eye, now fixed upon her, were such as to excite the tenderest compassion in her behalf.</p>
			<p>Unconscious as was this silent appeal on the part of the unhappy girl, Bayard was not the man to be insensible to it; and though she could not have explained the reason, she took encouragement from his answering glance, although he passed on without a word, without even an apology for spattering her hand and arm with cold water; a circumstance for which she could almost have thanked him, since she felt as if it had saved her from fainting.</p>
			<p>A moment after, and the brave youth, who feared neither censure nor ridicule in the cause of truth and humanity, had passed through the parlor, disposed of his glass of water, and returning through a side entrance, stood beside his friend Bloodgood, in the spacious china closet, adjoining the supper-room, where the latter had been superintending the unpacking of a new supply of wine, and now held a bottle which he was preparing to uncork.</p>
			<p>“Charlie!” exclaimed he, laying his hand on the shoulder of his friend.</p>
			<p>Young Bloodgood turned, colored, and became confused, as he met the calm, reproachful eye of Bayard, and answered with some embarrassment.</p>
			<p>“Ah! Bayard,⁠—you here? You’ll find a glass”⁠—</p>
			<p>“No, no, Charlie,” continued Bayard, “you know that is not what I am here for.” “Come, added he, coaxingly, “you have proved your hospitality enough to-night; let Lewis keep this out of sight; it is the greatest kindness you can do those fellows.”</p>
			<p>“Poh, nonsense! Bayard,” replied the other; “we are bound to entertain our guests”⁠—</p>
			<p>“But not to shame and ruin them. This plot to disgrace a stranger here to-night is scandalous and ought not to go on.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a plot of his own contriving,” answered Bloodgood, laughing. “If a man will make a buffoon of himself, he is the best judge of his own conduct and the only sufferer by it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, Charlie, you are mistaken,” responded Bayard, earnestly. “The greatest sufferer is that noble looking, beautiful, unhappy girl, who stands in the doorway with a heart bleeding for her poor brother. I will not see her proud head brought low by his glaring folly and misconduct; I will not look on and not lend a word and a hand to save her from mortification and him from scorn.”</p>
			<p>A shout of merriment from the next room, and an impatient cry of “What has become of Bloodgood,” now caused the well-intentioned, but somewhat irresolute youth to endeavor to parry his friend’s arguments, and break away from him altogether, with the lightly-uttered words, “Ah, ha, Bayard! the girl has made a conquest of you, I see, and expects you to run a tilt on her light-headed brother’s account; but you cannot expect to make such a Don Quixote of me⁠—a man is not responsible for his guests.”</p>
			<p>“Bloodgood,” exclaimed Bayard, in a tone which had changed from simple earnestness to that of a just and righteous indignation,⁠—“I think a man is, to a great degree, responsible <em>for</em> his guests, and <em>to</em> them. It is folly for you to talk of any personal interest I can feel in either Miss Vaughan or her brother; I, who have never spoken a word to either, and to-morrow leave this part of the country for as many years, perhaps, as have passed since I was last an inmate of your father’s house. But one is a woman, and as such has a claim on your tenderness, and the other is a fellow-man, and is thus entitled to your sympathy. Charlie,” added he, in a tone at once affectionate and firm, “we have known each other from boys, have passed our college life and vacations in each other’s company, and I have hoped most earnestly to welcome you one day to my distant home; but you and I cannot clasp hands in friendship to-night, or meet as friends in years to come, if you compel me to believe that you can be indifferent to a fellow being’s reputation and his sister’s peace.”</p>
			<p>The young man thus addressed hung down his head for a moment, fumbled with the cork-screw, which he held in his hand, then threw it on the closet shelf, and, with a candor which did him infinite credit, caught the hand of Bayard and shook it with hearty warmth, exclaiming, “Bayard, I cannot afford to lose your friendship; it has been the greatest blessing of my life; this is not the first time you have saved me from folly, if from nothing worse,” and energetically kicking the champagne basket underneath the shelf, he locked his arm in that of his friend, and they entered the supper-room together, when Charlie, following Bayard’s example, employed himself with ready tact in dispersing the group awaiting him around the supper-table.</p>
			<p>“No, no, Fred,” said he, shaking his head emphatically, “Vaughan has drank enough,⁠—it is too bad. Boone, I believe your sisters are wishing to say good-night to my mother. Lander, will you come into the library and see the picture I have had taken of my dog?”</p>
			<p>Bayard, in the meantime, after intimating to such as would be likely to heed the suggestion, that the young ladies in the drawing-room were wondering what had become of the gentlemen, obtained through Bloodgood an introduction to Harry, and gradually contriving to withdraw him from his now scattering circle of associates, led the way to a little room where coffee was served. As the maniac, or the wild beast, may frequently be calmed and subdued by the power of a fixed eye and a resolute will, so the unfortunate young man, dispossessed at once of reason and self-government, yielded himself, without resistance, to the guidance and control of one who, by a union of persuasion, tact, and unyielding purpose, contrived to gain an immediate and complete mastery over his bewildered and excited mind. With wandering eye and unsteady hand he lifted to his lips the cup of coffee, which Bayard hoped might in some degree serve as a restorative; and then, with a strange mingling of submission and free-will, suffered the latter to lock his arm within his, and conduct him through a low, open casement, leading to the piazza which ran around the house. Once only, as they left the lighted room behind them, and stepped out into the cool night-air, Harry manifested some slight uneasiness, and a disposition to break away from his new acquaintance; but either the animated conversation, the firm grasp, or the determined eye of Bayard, restrained him from this purpose; for it was abandoned as suddenly as formed, and he made no further opposition to the effectual ascendancy of superior physical and mental force.</p>
			<p>From the moment when Bayard thus came to the rescue, until that when he left the house with his self-assumed charge, he was followed by the anxious gaze of the agitated and trembling Mabel. She watched his face, his motions, understood his generous intentions at a glance, read the secret of his power, witnessed his success, and at length, with a heart relieved from an inexpressible weight, comforted herself with the assurance, that come what might, both she and her brother were under safe and certain guardianship.</p>
			<p>It was comparatively easy now to rally her self-possession, to converse with the friends, who almost at the same moment claimed her attention, to accompany them to the drawing-room, and once more resume her part in that social scene, which to all but her seemed replete with gaiety and pleasure. From the window near which she stood she could distinguish two tall figures walking slowly up and down at a distance beneath the trees. As if they had been the sentinels stationed without some post of danger, she felt herself animated with new confidence and hope, as at regular intervals they passed and repassed within her sight. So long as they continued thus to pace the grounds, Harry was saved from further exposure, and herself from embarrassment and shame. This knowledge afforded security for the present moment, and beyond that she dared not think.</p>
			<p>It was growing late, however. Some persons who lived at a distance had left already, and there was a murmur among the company, such as usually precedes departure. The figures of the young men were no longer discernible in the dim moonlight, and Mabel began once more to experience a painful uncertainty and dread, which reached its height, when, on looking up, she saw Bayard standing just within the room, unaccompanied by Harry, and apparently looking about him in search of some one. Suddenly he caught her eye, and instantly crossing the room, approached, and spoke in a voice inaudible to any one but herself.</p>
			<p>“Miss Vaughan,” said he, as if certain of being understood, “your brother is engaged in giving some orders about his horse: if you will allow me the honor, I shall be happy to accompany you to our hostess, and afterwards see you to your carriage.”</p>
			<p>Unhesitatingly, and without a word, she took his offered arm; in some mechanical manner, she scarcely knew how, said farewell to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood, and with a hurried step ran up stairs for her cloak. He awaited her in the hall on her return, but so hasty had been her preparations for the drive, that when they reached the door-step the carriage was not brought up. By this time she shook and trembled violently; the night air was damp and chilly, and Bayard, perceiving her agitation to be such that she could scarcely stand, proposed her re-entering the house for a few moments.</p>
			<p>She shook her head to express her unwillingness to return, but did not speak; and he, seeing that she trembled more and more, unfolded a heavy shawl which she had brought down stairs over her arm, and wrapped it around her. As he did so, one or two hot tears fell upon his hand, while a shiver ran through her whole frame, which was not the effect of cold. Unwilling to leave her, and yet anxious concerning Harry, fearful, too, that others of the company would pour out upon the door-steps, he begged her to take his arm again, and proposed that they should walk a short distance in the direction of the stable, to learn the cause of the delay.</p>
			<p>With the simple confidence of a child she did as he requested, and just at the rear of the house they encountered Harry, who, engaged in an idle dispute with a groom on the subject of his mare’s harness, seemed quite unconscious that his sister was awaiting his movements. Mad Sallie, meanwhile, irritated and unmanageable beyond her wont, was starting from side to side and now and then plunging furiously forward.</p>
			<p>Bayard’s presence and prompt interference soon restored harmony, however. Both Harry and the groom were ready to submit their difference to him, and even Mad Sallie was soothed into quietness by his voice and hand, as he spoke gently to her and stroked her mane while he critically examined every point of the harness. “Do not be afraid,” said he in a low voice as he handed Mabel into the light vehicle; “I am confident you will reach town in safety.” He drew back as he ceased speaking, for Harry, who was already seated in the carriage, had taken up the reins and now incautiously snapped his whip. Mad Sallie started, reared, plunged forward, then backed for a pace or two, and finally dashed off at full speed. The groom held up his lantern once more to see that all was right, and as the carriage swept rapidly round the corner of the house, the glare fell full on the face of Mabel, who had lifted her hitherto bowed head, and turned to bestow a parting glance on her own and her brother’s benefactor.</p>
			<p>How much of grief and how much of gratitude may be revealed in a single look! Had Bayard’s humane and generous deed involved a tenfold effort, and demanded a tenfold sacrifice, his noble heart would have asked no higher reward than the glow of deep, fervent, and grateful feeling which flashed out from that pale, tearful, sorrow-struck face, turned towards him for an instant, and then borne away into the darkness.</p>
			<p>“Only by bearing each other’s burdens can we read the secrets of each other’s hearts,” thought he, as he stood listening until the carriage had passed in safety through the gateway at the end of the avenue. “How strangely did I misjudge and wrong that suffering girl.”</p>
			<p>His mental recantation was interrupted by the blunt voice of the Irish groom. “Go it, yer young rascal;” exclaimed the man, “and the blessed angel beside ye be the savin’ o’ yer bones”.</p>
			<p>“Bring up my horse as quick as you can, Patrick,” said Bayard, turning abruptly to the fellow, who was starting in the direction of the stable.</p>
			<p>“Sure, Misther Bayard, ye’ll not be afther goin’ to L⁠⸺ to-night.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I have concluded to sleep at the hotel there; and, Patrick, I shall be much obliged to you if you will bring my luggage over in the morning in season for the early train. I will speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles about it,” and so saying he hastened into the house.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s first sensations as she drove down the avenue and gained the open road, were those only of indescribable relief and deliverance from dreaded danger. But though her brother was rescued from further disgrace, no trifling peril of a far different nature awaited them both. She could not disguise from herself the fact that Harry was incapable of managing his spirited steed or of distinguishing the road, the intricacy of which she well remembered. The night was dark; there was more than one bridge to be crossed, while, at a certain point, their way wound along the verge of a precipitous bank, and was protected only by a slender railing. Fortunately, for the first mile or two the road was wide and unencumbered, so that the rapid pace at which they started was maintained for awhile without disaster of any kind. Then Harry, who had been boisterous and talkative, relapsed into silence, slackened his reins, and suffered the mare to fall into a walk. They proceeded at this rate for some little distance, and were just approaching a point where the road branched, when Harry’s head sank upon Mabel’s shoulder, and she perceived that he had fallen asleep. Tremblingly she caught the reins as they dropped from his powerless hands, and suffering him to retain his recumbent posture, assumed for the first time and under the most painful circumstances, the responsible office that had thus devolved upon her.</p>
			<p>At this crisis, she heard the welcome sound of horses’ hoofs, and although in the darkness she could distinguish nothing with certainty, she soon became convinced that for her all danger was past. A horseman soon overtook them, and then slackening the pace at which he rode, silently performed for the remainder of the drive the combined duties of protector, guide, and friend. At every fork in the road he led the way, and Mad Sallie instinctively followed. At every point of danger he kept perseveringly at the animal’s side, and more than once Mabel was conscious that he led her by the rein. Now in advance and now in the rear, sometimes quite obscured in the darkness, and again dimly discerned as he loitered on the brow of a hill, but always near enough for the sound of his horse’s feet to be distinctly audible, he might have been deemed an accidental traveller on the road, but for the watchful and efficient care which he exercised over his voluntarily assumed charge. It was a strange situation for a young and delicately-reared girl;⁠—supporting with one arm the sleeping form of him who should have been her natural protector, grasping with her white-gloved and trembling hand the reins which ordinarily she would not have dared to touch, and dependent in the darkness of midnight and the solitude of the lonely road, upon the guardianship of a stranger. Such was the confidence, however, with which Bayard had inspired her, that from the moment when she instinctively realized the presence of one whom in the obscurity she could not otherwise recognize, she experienced an undoubted sense of security, and felt the force of his prophetic assurance, that there was no cause for fear. Not until they gained the partially lit streets of the town did he fail to keep within her hearing. As they rattled over the pavements of the principal thoroughfare, however, the sound of his horse’s feet in the rear gradually became more and more indistinct; and Mabel, as she now realized her position more fully by the light of the street lamps, and attempted to rouse her sleeping brother, was almost tempted to believe that she herself had been under the influence of a strange, wild dream, and that their fancied outrider was merely an hallucination of the senses. It was no easy task to arouse Harry’s slumbering faculties, and even after they had reached their aunt’s door in safety, Mabel hesitated and feared to alight, lest he should prove incapable of guiding Mad Sallie to her stable at some distance down the street.</p>
			<p>Trusting partly to the creature’s instinct, and encouraged by some signs of renewed vivacity and intelligence in Harry, who stretched himself energetically, declared it was a deused bore to ride so far at night, and pettishly shook the reins which he had snatched from her hand, she stepped, unassisted and at some risk upon the sidewalk, and stood watching him as he continued on his way. At this moment her doubts, if such actually existed, concerning the reality of their midnight escort were at once dispersed, for as she lingered anxiously in the gate-way, looking down the street, he rode suddenly past her, and disappeared in the direction Harry had taken. Nor was his identity with Bayard any less evident, when, a half-hour later, she cautiously opened the door of her aunt’s house to admit her recreant brother, and, as he staggered in, the light shone full on the retreating figure of one who, from first to last, had proved himself a friend.</p>
			<p>It mattered not to Mabel that he had misunderstood and falsely interpreted her character. On the contrary, it but added to the heroism of his conduct, that it admitted of no selfish construction, that it was as disinterested as it was manly and humane. He had freely expressed, in her hearing, his unflattering opinion of herself, and of Harry he might almost believe the worst, and yet to both he had acted a Christian part. Mabel was not ungrateful for his kindness to the beauty and the belle, the general admiration of whom he did not profess to share, but it was not for this that she most fervently thanked and blessed him. It was for the benefit conferred on Harry, and through him, on her. It was because he alone of all the world had lent a willing and a helping hand to her sinking, sunken brother.</p>
			<p>We rejoice and triumph when the world bestows its homage and its smiles upon our great, our noble, and our virtuous beloved; but the deeper fountains of the heart are stirred when a hand is stretched out in sympathy and in aid to our poor, our fallen, and our sinful ones. We feel that the honor paid to worth is a sentiment which ennobles humanity; but the voice that whispers of hope to the fallen is more than half divine. Thus, the emotion which Bayard had awakened in Mabel was that of reverent gratitude, and was treasured in after years as a sacred memory. They had met, as it were, on one of the cross roads of life; she dimly comprehended that on the morrow he was to depart into some unknown but distant exile; she had parted from him without a word of acknowledgement or of thanks. Still she felt that for his service to virtue and humanity he would never go unrewarded, and on bended knee, in the silence of the night, she prayed that the God of Heaven might be with him in his wanderings, and that He might minister to him in his hour of need, who has said of the simplest deed of charity, “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
