<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 37</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Bread of our souls! whereon we feed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">True manna from on high!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our guide and chart! wherein we read</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of realms beyond the sky.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Bernard Barton.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Ever since the period of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie’s sickness and death, the mind of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had seemed to some degree weaned from the one haunting and harrowing subject to which its energies had for the last ten years been directed, and the River Valley Railroad, with all the expectations involved in it, though not abandoned by him, had ceased to absorb his thoughts. The saddening and solemnizing event which had deprived him of a valued friend, could not fail to remind him of the mortality which sets bounds to all earthly schemes. The presence of the bereaved orphan in his household had excited in him a truly paternal sympathy; and finally, her marriage with his son, in which he took a deeper satisfaction than was suffered to appear, had imparted to his present experience a genuine and touching interest, which had for a time dispelled the eager and calculating spirit by which he had hitherto been actuated.</p>
			<p>Thus he was, as we have seen on the occasion of Percival’s visit, more than usually alive to topics relating to the public welfare, and not only took upon himself readily the duties of a host, but manifested in the young man’s society a pleasure and animation truly astonishing to those who knew him only as the abstracted, self-absorbed, and disappointed man.</p>
			<p>Scarcely had this agreeable episode in his ordinary life terminated, however, when the old man once more became a prey to the all-engrossing object of his fond aspirations, and the mind which had partially recovered its equanimity, was plunged into the mad vortex of bewildering and exciting emotions.</p>
			<p>That effervescent and speculative portion of the community, which is ever anxious to push the car of progress to an alarming rate of speed, and on whom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had throughout based all his reliance, began once more to turn their eyes to that comprehensive scheme of public improvement, which included the realization of his hopes; and the torch thus kindled proved all-sufficient to fire his slumbering energies with a new and lively enthusiasm. Communications were received and dispatched by every mail; Mabel and the boys being employed as amanuenses by the enfeebled man, whose trembling hand could no longer keep pace with his excited ideas. Messengers arrived from various directions, engineers and surveyors made their appearance in the vicinity, and routes, boundaries and grades, stocks, contracts, and government appropriations, were the engrossing subjects of thought, conversation, and correspondence. Once more the roll of charts, recently fallen into comparative disuse, was brought forward, examined, and allotted a conspicuous place on the table of the little parlor, now become the scene of eager consultations; and once more old Sorrel was called into requisition for those journeyings which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, despite his years, undertook as readily as in former times, usually accompanied, however, by one of his grandsons, both of whom shared Mabel’s anxious sense of responsibility concerning him.</p>
			<p>But this period of suspense and agitation proved as short-lived as it was sudden and engrossing. Difficulties presented themselves on every hand, public appropriations were refused, private resources failed to be forthcoming, discouragement succeeded discouragement, and finally, after a fortnight of vain discussion, the originators of the movement, having exhausted their fruitless zeal, dropped off one by one, and the early pilot on this voyage of adventure found himself, as he had so often done before, standing solitary and deserted amid the wreck of his fallen hopes.</p>
			<p>It was too much for him; and on the day when, forsaken by his allies, he beheld the downfall of the last stronghold on which his expectations had been founded, he turned his steps homeward, and, with a despairing countenance, trembling gait, and hoary head sunk upon his breast, declined all nourishment, and sought his bed, from which he seemed destined never to rise again.</p>
			<p>Nor was it mental despondency alone which had thus reduced him. In his eager pursuit of the fortune which he felt to be at length almost within his grasp, he had spared himself neither privation, exposure, nor fatigue, frequently continuing abroad until a late hour, unprotected from the heavy night-dews, eating his meals with but little appetite or regularity, and deprived, by excitement, of all natural and refreshing rest. These circumstances, acting upon a constitution already enfeebled by anxiety and years, could have but one result; and when, at last, the suspense was ended, and the blow of final disappointment struck home, it was disease no less than despair, which prostrated the aged man, and alarmed his family at once for his reason and his life.</p>
			<p>He asked no questions, expressed no wants, and made no complaints; his only sign of intelligence being conveyed in the mournful inquiry with which he scanned the faces about him, as if seeking to discover whether his family shared his anguish at the bursting of fortune’s bubble; and it was not until symptoms of pneumonia made their appearance, that the village physician was summoned and his condition rightly understood.</p>
			<p>All ordinary avocations were now abandoned, and the whole household united in attentions and devotion to one whom Mabel’s example, no less than their own feelings, had taught them to regard with that tenderness which is usually paid exclusively to infancy. His comfortable bed-room opened directly into their only parlor; but the perfect quiet which reigned there was never disturbed by this circumstance, for even Murray shared the general solicitude, and softened his voice instinctively the moment he entered the house. Mabel, whose capabilities as a nurse had been well proved already, was ever at the post of duty, reinforced and aided, however, by Alick, who, patient, gentle, and capable as a woman, placed himself at his grandfather’s bedside and waited on him with an assiduity which was touching in a youth of his years. Thus nursed with the most faithful devotion, and preserved from every agitating sight and sound, it soon became evident that while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s outward man was wrestling with deep-seated disease, and his life hung, as it were, upon a thread, his mind was gradually resuming more than its wonted calmness, and his face was marked with serenity and repose. His eye, which at times had been penetrating in its stare, or blank with vacuity, now wore a mild, benignant expression as it was turned upon his daughter, sister, and grandchildren; and as he watched their movements about his room, his countenance indicated pleasure and satisfaction at the peace, harmony, and good order which pervaded the apartment.</p>
			<p>As his disease approached the stage when the physician confessed apprehensions for the life of his patient, Murray was despatched to communicate the tidings to Harry and Helen, who hastened to him without delay; but, on their arrival, the crisis had already passed, the patient had rallied, and there was now a prospect of his speedy recovery.</p>
			<p>“I thought I never should see you again, my boy,” said the feeble invalid, as he stretched out his wasted hand and clasped that of his son in cordial and tender greeting. “I have been very ill.”</p>
			<p>The strong man was subdued in Harry, as he beheld the wasted form of his father, and marked the unusual depth and pathos of his tones. He could not trust himself to speak, but sat down at the head of the bed, a little out of sight.</p>
			<p>“I have had another disappointment, Harry,” said the old man, in a low, expressive tone, at the same time turning his head a little that he might see his son’s face. “Did you know that?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, father,” said Harry; “I know all about it, and I hope it is the last you will ever have on the subject. It is not worth a regret, except for the illness it has caused you. No advantage we could have from that quarter could make us half so happy as we shall be now, when we see you well again.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who had turned his eyes in another direction, once more fixed them on his son, as if to judge of his sincerity; then, apparently satisfied, he inquired for Helen, who at once came forward, saying, “Here I am, Sir, only waiting my turn!”</p>
			<p>He smiled affectionately upon her, thanked her for coming so far to see a sick old man, made her sit down on the side of his bed, and would have wearied himself with questioning her concerning her new home, but the doctor fortunately came in at the moment and saved him from the consequences of too much fatigue.</p>
			<p>“Leave the door open, Mabel,” said he, when his daughter, who, later in the evening came to bring him a cup of tea, was about to close the door opening into the parlor. “Do not be afraid of disturbing me; I like to hear you talk. Inquire of Harry about his farm and his crops, and tell him about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival’s visit to us and his address to the people.”</p>
			<p>Wondering, scarcely daring to trust the evidence of her senses, Mabel did as she was requested, asking herself, meanwhile, what could have awakened in her hitherto self-absorbed and indifferent parent, such a thoughtful interest in his children’s conversation and pursuits. She half suspected that it had its source in feverish excitement, and that he would experience, in consequence, a wakeful night, possibly a relapse. But, on the contrary, the soft murmur of pleasant voices seemed to have a soothing influence upon the invalid, for his sleep was more than usually refreshing, and, so far from his suffering a relapse, two days after, when Harry and Helen left to return home, he was decidedly convalescent.</p>
			<p>One evening, while he was still confined to his bed, Mabel, who had been sitting beside him for an hour or more, rose, listened a moment to his regular breathing, then, believing him to be asleep, went cautiously out into the parlor, and, in her anxiety to close the latch gently, unintentionally left the door ajar. It was the season of the brilliant harvest moon, whose rays were streaming across the floor, and Sabiah, who always loved a moonlight night, was enjoying it at her favorite window. Weary with the labors of the day, and suffering also from a headache, which was unusual to her, Mabel approached with a languid step, and, sitting down on a low footstool, leaned against her aunt’s knee. They had remained thus in silence for some time, when Sabiah almost startled her niece by the abruptness and warmth with which she exclaimed, “Mabel, I am afraid you will be an old maid!”</p>
			<p>The low, merry laugh which succeeded Mabel’s first astonishment at her aunt’s earnestness, seemed to signify how little she dreaded the doom of which Sabiah had such a fearful foreboding.</p>
			<p>“Ay, you may laugh now,” said Sabiah, “but it will be a different thing when you come to be an old woman and have nobody to love you or take care of you. You think you can’t do enough for those boys, and Harry, and your father, and me, and you never stop to ask what is going to become of yourself. It’s well enough, now, while you can have the comfort of feeling that we couldn’t do without you, but what if you should find yourself at last all alone in the world, with nobody to care whether you lived or died?”</p>
			<p>“Has it been so with you, Aunt?” asked Mabel.</p>
			<p>“No, child!” answered Sabiah, with feeling, at the same time smoothing Mabel’s hair tenderly with her hand. “I thank God for the mercy with which he is leading me on the downhill of life. But don’t trust to my experience. You won’t find another Mabel in the world.”</p>
			<p>“I shall always find somebody to love,” said Mabel; “somebody to whom I can be of use.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I am sure of that,” said Sabiah. “You’ll find such, if any body can; but if there was one thing more than another that I have prayed might come to pass, it was that I might live to see you a happy wife. But, oh! there’s disappointments everywhere. When you were in New York I used always to be afraid some scapegrace would be hanging round after your father’s money. There was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley⁠—to be sure, I always liked him, and thought something would come of his following you up so sharp, but you couldn’t seem between you to make that go.”</p>
			<p>Mabel smiled thoughtfully, as she remembered the indiscriminate zeal with which her aunt had always espoused Dudley’s interests. There was no other emotion awakened in her heart, however, at the mention of his name. The events connected with this early preference, viewed as they were through the glass of a memory laden with anxieties and care, seemed to be rather a part of her child-life, than a bitter and realized fact in her womanhood.</p>
			<p>“And now, out here,” continued Sabiah,⁠—“well, they used to say, when I was a gal, if you are meant to be married, you will be, and you may as well sit in the chimney corner and wait; but, la, one might wait here to all eternity and never see any body that was good enough for you. Ah, that’s the rub, after all, to find any body that’s good enough for you, Mabel!”</p>
			<p>“I never saw but one person that was good enough for her,” said Alick, who had come in unperceived.</p>
			<p>“And who was that, pray?” asked Sabiah.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Sabiah, “I know you boys think there never was anything that could hold a candle to him. And so he is a handsome fellow, and very entertaining; but he isn’t thinking about a wife. His head is full of politics. Besides, I always have a dread of your political characters⁠—they make the most miserable husbands.”</p>
			<p>“Aunt Mabel,” said Alick, whose thoughtful mind often led him from the special topic of conversation into the wider field of philosophy, “do you think a man is any more likely to forget simple, every-day duties, because he is engaged in a great work, and has a great object in view?”</p>
			<p>“I think it depends altogether upon his motives, Alick,” replied Mabel. “If he is influenced merely by selfishness and ambition, he would probably pursue his prize at the expense of every other claim, whether small or great; but I do not believe that a man who is actuated by pure Christian benevolence is any less faithful to simple duties, because he is also striving to benefit humanity in a larger sphere of usefulness.”</p>
			<p>“Nobody can doubt that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival is disinterested,” said Alick; “he proved it when he was not much older than I am. Did you know, Auntie, that he inherited a handsome property from an uncle of his mother’s, when he was only eighteen years old, and that, as soon as he became of age, he insisted upon dividing it with his half-sister, a widow, who has several children and is lame? He took this Western property for his share, at a very high valuation, and gave up all the rest, except a portion which was secured to his mother for her life time. General Percival objected very much to the arrangement, because he feared his brother would regret it when he grew older. But so far from that, a few years ago, when the General was ill, and on half pay, Bayard assisted him very much in the education of his family, and even had his daughter, Bessie, thoroughly instructed in music.”</p>
			<p>“Who told you this, Alick? Not <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival?” said Mabel, at the same time pondering in her mind Dudley’s insinuations concerning the difficulty which had existed in the family with regard to settling the estate.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no! Uncle Harry heard of it from a gentleman whose father was one of the trustees of the property. But I know that it cost <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival a sacrifice; because I mentioned to him the other morning that I had a great desire to go into one of the territories and settle, when I got older, and he remarked, that when he was of my age he had a strong preference for living in New York, but that he was very glad he decided as he did.”</p>
			<p>“Auntie,” said Murray, who had come in while Alick was speaking, “I wonder why grandfather cares so much about making a great fortune. Uncle Harry says that Al and I ought to be very thankful we have got our own living to earn, for that money came very near being the ruin of him, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival, although he would have been a fine man anywhere, would never have been the man he is if he had not been obliged to exert himself.”</p>
			<p>“Wealth is a great temptation, and a great responsibility,” said Mabel. “I hope, if you ever possess it, you will have first learned how to make it truly valuable.”</p>
			<p>A conversation now ensued with reference to the boys’ future choice of professions, in which they might hope for usefulness and success; a not infrequent subject of discussion, but which was, on this occasion, terminated by Mabel’s remarking, “It is getting late, boys; Aunt Sabiah looks tired, and we shall have ample time to consider the comparative merits of the different professions before either of you are obliged to come to a decision. In the mean time, we will remember that the most honorable calling for each of us, is that which we are best capable of fulfilling. Murray, please ask Melissa for a light. Shall we read now, Aunt Sabiah?” and rising from her low seat, Mabel took the Bible and prayer-book from the table, and when Murray came back with the lamp, read, according to their evening custom, a portion of Scripture and a simple prayer, such as she and the boys had become familiar with from long use of their little service-book. Aunt Sabiah, who had formerly held herself aloof from this act of social worship, now joined in it with humble fervor; while as the sound of their united voices penetrated to the ears of one, who, through the open door of the adjoining room, had overheard every syllable that fell from their lips during the evening, another aged heart was touched, and another voice responded in an earnest Amen.</p>
			<p>“Good night, my daughter,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, as Mabel was leaving his room, after moving about with a light step to see that everything was arranged for his comfort, shading the lamp with her hand, lest its rays might wake the supposed sleeper.</p>
			<p>“Are you awake, father?” asked she, in some surprise.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my child, wide awake; more so than for many a long year. My eyes are opened at last, Mabel, to the truths to which they have long⁠—too long⁠—been closed; come and kiss me before you go to bed.” And as she stooped over him to fulfil the unusual request, he added, “you are a good girl, my dear⁠—a great blessing to your old father.”</p>
			<p>The next evening, when one of the boys went to seek the Bible in its customary place, it could not be found. Mabel rose to assist in the search, and at length discovered it on the little table beside her father’s bed, with his spectacles between its covers. Occasionally, afterwards, it was missing, and was found in the same place; and once Mabel observed the old man attentively reading it. He laid it down, upon perceiving her, however, and no remark was made on either side.</p>
			<p>At length his strength, which was only restored by slow degrees, became so far established that he was able to leave his room, and once more take his place at the parlor fireside. One day, when he had been thus seated for some hours, gazing into the fire, communing with his own thoughts and apparently unconscious of everything around him, he suddenly lifted his head and exclaimed to his daughter, who was the only person present, “Mabel, bring me my charts!”</p>
			<p>With trembling reluctance she obeyed him; though as she placed the roll in his hand she still retained a slight hold upon it, longing to intercede and beg him to refrain from harassing his mind with the dreaded subject, but restrained by filial deference from thus interfering. His manner, however, was decisive, and she relinquished the papers, still maintaining her place beside him, and awaiting his movements. To her astonishment, he deliberately unrolled the outside chart, and without hesitation tore it down the middle, and committed the fragments to the flames; then removing the next, he dealt with it in like manner, and so on, successively, until the whole were consumed.</p>
			<p>Great as had been Mabel’s horror of this deceitful schedule of future fortune, she could not resist a sudden shudder and sensation of alarm, as she thus witnessed the annihilation of the time-worn papers, which she had learned to regard with a species of awe. She was reassured, however, by the calm, self-satisfied smile with which her father looked up at her, when the work of destruction was accomplished. More completely still was she conscious of the sanity of his purpose, when, laying his hand upon the Bible, which rested on the table beside him, he said, solemnly, “Henceforward, Mabel, this is my only chart; and the only road which shall engross my thoughts, is that which leadeth to eternal rest. I have striven too long after the things which perish, forgetful of those which endure unto everlasting life. I have coveted for my children the wealth which would have been to them but a snare, while they, without my aid, have sought and found the pearl of great price. Yes, Mabel, I have been strangely blind to the welfare of my family; but God has done for me and mine more and better than I could ask or think.”</p>
			<p>“We are very happy, father,” said Mabel, “far more so than when the world envied our good fortune.”</p>
			<p>“I see it, my child; I understand it now,” said the old man, with a serene smile. “The Lord has dealt bountifully with me; He has given me the true riches, and made my children a crown of glory to my aged head. Henceforth my prayer shall be, ‘Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths!’ ”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
