<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Not every flower that blossoms</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Diffuses sweets around;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not every scene hope gilds with light</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Will fair be found.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S. J.</abbr> Hale.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Engrossed with this new scheme for the indulgence of her vanity, Louise hastened at once to her friend’s apartment, and lingered there so long, that before her return the carriage came for Mabel, who could not find her scarf, and supposing that she must have left it in the nursery was compelled to go there and seek it. As she opened the door unheard, and stood unperceived in the room, a sight met her eyes which excited both her sympathy and her interest. Poor Lydia, overcome with grief, had thrown herself upon the narrow bed usually occupied by one of the children, and so vehement were the sobs she uttered, that they shook her whole frame convulsively. Her eyes were fixed and vacant, and there was an hysterical gasping in her throat, which frightened Mabel, lest the girl might be choking with an emotion which she evidently could not control. Alick was standing beside her,⁠—his face no longer apathetic and indifferent, but expressive both of sorrow and indignation. He seemed to be making an endeavor to soothe her, and as Mabel entered the room she heard him say, “I shouldn’t care for her, Lydia,⁠—she’s a cross old thing.” At first Murray was no where to be seen; but on taking a nearer view, Mabel perceived the little fellow, who, really affectionate in his disposition and truly grieved at his own share in causing Lydia’s distress, had crept upon the bed, and was nestled close beside her, with one arm round her neck. At the sound of Mabel’s voice speaking kindly to her, Lydia gave a sudden start, and the presence of a stranger seeming to act as a powerful motive for self-control, she succeeded in somewhat mastering her agitation. Mabel took a glass of water from the table and sprinkled a little of it on her face, as she had seen <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert do on a similar occasion. The shock acted as a restorative, and after a few more gasps the excited girl found relief in natural and fast flowing tears.</p>
			<p>Mabel, although a stranger to such emergencies, spoke a few words of comfort to her, which drew forth in return an expression of poor Lydia’s overcharged feelings. “Indeed, miss,” she sobbed forth, “I meant no harm, but I felt so bad at what she said about the children, you wouldn’t wonder if you knew⁠—” here her words were lost in tears, but she soon recovered herself and added,⁠—“So now I’ve lost my place, and I don’t know what I shall do.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll ask mother to keep you,” said Murray, in a soothing tone.</p>
			<p>Lydia smiled upon the wayward child, but said nothing. Alick, in the meantime, stood a little in the background, gazing in the face of Mabel, who looked concerned for the girl, but uncertain what part to take in the matter herself. As, after a few moment’s pause, she turned to leave the room, she was arrested by Alick, who exclaimed, as if in further explanation of Lydia’s conduct, “She can’t get her money now, and its too bad; she wanted it for her mother and Rosy. Mother said she wouldn’t pay her, and she won’t, she’s just so ugly.”</p>
			<p>Mabel’s countenance evinced how much she was shocked by the boy’s unfilial language, but he did not perceive this; his eyes were following the hand with which she now sought her purse. Poor Lydia, in the meantime, was the picture of mortification and distress. Words of bitter disappointment on her part had betrayed to the observing Alick the secret of her family’s necessity, but despite her dependent situation, she had a sensitive pride which shrank from Mabel’s becoming a partner to this knowledge.</p>
			<p>Mabel, scarcely less disconcerted, for she was a novice in such circumstances, inquired the amount due her for the services which were now at an end.</p>
			<p>“Six dollars,” said Lydia, in a faltering voice, “but, O miss, it’s no matter.”</p>
			<p>The sum was in her hand before she had finished speaking. “Never mind,” said Mabel, soothingly, and putting aside the hand which offered to return the money, “keep it,⁠—do,⁠—and I will arrange the matter with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy some other time.”</p>
			<p>Then, anxious to escape the half-audible thanks of Lydia, she hastily left the room, followed by the wondering, admiring gaze of Alick. Murray manifesting his satisfaction in an equally characteristic manner, by attempting to turn a somerset on the bed.</p>
			<p>A quick blush of surprise and embarrassment overspread her face, as, on re-entering the drawing-room, she discovered Louise standing near the half-open door of the nursery, where she must have plainly overheard all that had passed within. She was trying the effect of the coral ear-rings at an opposite mirror, and did not even turn her head, on Mabel’s sudden entrance. Had the latter been detected in a mean, instead of a generous action, she could scarcely have been more disconcerted than she now felt, at the consciousness of having played what her sister might consider an officious and censorious part in a matter with which she had no immediate concern. There was an awkward silence between them, interrupted at length by Louise, who, after impatiently jerking one of the ear-rings, and finally entangling it in her hair, exclaimed in an imperious and ruffled tone of voice, “Do, Mabel, see what is the matter with this,⁠—I can’t do anything with it!”</p>
			<p>Mabel hastened to extricate and clasp the refractory ornament, and then stood by the side of the irritable little beauty, who, after surveying herself for a moment with no slight degree of satisfaction, exclaimed, “How pretty they are! I wish they were mine! If I had money to throw away,” continued she in a meaning tone, “as some folks have, I would buy me a pair this very day!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, they are quite pretty and becoming,” said Mabel, with an absent air. She understood her sister’s allusion, and fearing she had given deep offence, was meditating an excuse for her own presumption on the score of poor Lydia’s necessities.</p>
			<p>“I hope,” added Louise, tartly, and with a short, contemptuous laugh, “that you do not mean to charge me with all that wastefulness you have been guilty of in the next room; your purse must be longer than mine if you can afford to pay people for putting on airs and getting up scenes.”</p>
			<p>Mabel, astonished at her sister’s meanness and indifference to distress, was at a loss for a reply to this unexpected outburst; but Louise, having thus given vent to her vexation, and at the same time disowned a debt which she never intended to discharge, seemed to be immediately restored to good humor, and dismissing the subject with the same ease with which a child forgets its little annoyance at the sight of a new toy, she entered with flippant and eager gaiety upon the subject of the evening’s entertainment.</p>
			<p>Mabel could not so easily free herself from the agitation and embarrassment to which her sister’s words and her own awkward situation had given rise; but, relieved to find the affair amicably settled, although at the expense both of her purse and her feelings, she lent a ready ear to all the theatrical details which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy had gleaned from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, and from Victoria, who was to take part in the performance. It would be a charming occasion, but it was on Mabel’s account, chiefly, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy professed to congratulate herself at the opportunity; it would be something so new to her, and so interesting. Harry, too, would be delighted to escort them.</p>
			<p>Mabel hesitated. She was strongly tempted by her sister’s glowing description of the exciting scene they should witness, the lovely little theatre, its decorations, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; but at the mention of Harry’s name, she remembered the understanding between herself and her brother, that they were to have a quiet evening at home. She mentioned this circumstance to Louise as a motive for relinquishing the project, and once more the good-humored smile vanished from the face of the latter, who, resuming, as it were, her previous right to be angry with Mabel, turned coldly away, saying in an offended tone, “Very well,⁠—I shall stay at home then, of course; I have no wish to go alone.”</p>
			<p>Mabel’s countenance betrayed signs of indecision at sight of Louise’s disappointment and displeasure. She had already given offence once this morning; she could not bear to be thought censorious or disobliging; but what would Harry think of the proposal?</p>
			<p>Reflections of this and a similar nature were interrupted by a fretful expostulation from Louise, who, comprehending her chief cause of hesitation, exclaimed, “It is nonsense to think of staying at home on Harry’s account, for I will venture to say, he is full of the idea himself before this time. Several of his friends are among the <i xml:lang="la">dramatis personæ;</i> he will hear of the performance in the course of the day, and be quite enthusiastic on the subject.</p>
			<p>This last suggestion had the effect of overruling Mabel’s scruples, and just as she was on the point of departure she yielded a reluctant promise to send the carriage to the hotel, and be herself in readiness at an appointed hour, for which obliging concession she was rewarded by a radiant smile, and affectionate pressure of the hand, from the conciliated and satisfied Louise.</p>
			<p>But though Louise was satisfied, the case was far otherwise with Mabel; and the shadow which, during the homeward drive, clouded her usually happy features, had its rise in many contending, contradictory, but alike painful emotions.</p>
			<p>A young girl of eighteen, of a happy temperament, impulsive character, and warm affections, is not likely to prove a strict or severe judge of those faults and foibles which are concealed or atoned for by a pleasing and fascinating exterior; but Mabel, with all the romance, sensibility, and ardent imagination of girlhood, had a deep and steady love of justice, an unsophisticated sense of right, and an honest contempt for meanness and duplicity. She could not be blind or indifferent to those unexpected traits in her sister’s character, which the events of the morning had brought to light, and in proportion as fancy had hitherto invested Louise with mental and moral loveliness, did she shrink from the reality disclosed on a nearer view. The emotions awakened in Mabel’s mind, however, were somewhat indistinct and undefined, and she did not even attempt to analyze them. She felt, but did not reason, and the rambling nature of her reflections resulted only in a general sense of dissatisfaction and disappointment.</p>
			<p>The succession of vague doubts, regrets, and apprehensions, which chased each other through her mind, was suddenly put to flight as the carriage stopped at her father’s door, and a more immediate and pressing cause of anxiety forced itself upon her recollection. “What will Aunt Sabiah say to my long absence?” was her mental inquiry as she entered the house. The hall clock struck four as she passed up the staircase. “So late,” was her inward exclamation; “is it possible?” And then came the still more startling remembrance, that she had returned without the promised bit of ribbon. Truly, thought she, this is one of the days when everything goes wrong.</p>
			<p>Everything had certainly gone wrong thus far. Miss Sabiah had passed a lonely, cheerless day, and was proportionately depressed. With martyr-like spirit she had declined taking luncheon, a meal of no slight importance to one of her country habits, and it was with difficulty that she could be persuaded that it was not yet too late for a biscuit and a cup of chocolate, which Mabel brought with her own hands from the dining room; she declared that Mabel’s forgetfulness to purchase the ribbon was of no consequence,⁠—O, no,⁠—not the least: what consequence could it be whether she wore a new cap or an old one?</p>
			<p>From this hopeless state of despondency it would have been in vain for any one but Mabel to attempt to arouse her; but in the partial eyes of the aunt the favorite niece was never the chief delinquent; and after inveighing at intervals against Louise’s growing influence over her sister, and declaring herself quite resigned to the loss of Mabel’s future society, Miss Sabiah allowed herself to be cheered and comforted by listening to the contents of a bundle of old letters, which Mabel read aloud until dark, manifesting a degree of girlish interest in the musty heap of ancestral details which truly warmed the heart of her maiden aunt.</p>
			<p>Both then and afterwards, Mabel carefully avoided all reference to her visit at the hotel, unwilling to excite her aunt’s prejudices by relating the stormy occurrences of the morning, and Miss Sabiah, on her part, scorned to make any inquiries concerning Louise and her mode of life, subjects on which she professed perfect indifference.</p>
			<p>But the perplexities and annoyances of this unfortunate day were not yet at an end. At dinner, Mabel waited in vain in the hope that Harry, who had returned home from his excursion-party fatigued but in high spirits, would broach the subject of the theatricals; he remained provokingly silent on the subject, however, and when, after dinner, he called for his slippers and proposed going for his flute to accompany her on the piano, she was reluctantly compelled to confess the promise she had made to Louise, explaining at the same time her own reluctance to accede to the proposal, until over-persuaded by her sister’s confident assurance that he would be delighted to accompany them.</p>
			<p>She hardly knew whether to be hurt or amused at the raillery which her communication called forth. “And so you really believed that humbuggery!” exclaimed Harry. “Here have I been, these last two days, employing all the arts of a blackleg to keep clear of those jackanapes, who were trying to entice me into that nonsensical farce. Why, I have hardly dared show myself in any of their haunts, and have been half afraid of my own shadow lest it should take the form of a stage manager; and you, innocent lamb that you are, would lead me into the very thick of the fight. Why, they would condemn me, without mercy, to the part of Julius Cæsar, or worse still, that of Vic Vannecker’s lover; upon my word, my dear, they are a perfect set of harpies.”</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah now began to expostulate against Mabel’s life being sacrificed to late hours and bad weather, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan taking alarm at these intimations, looked up from his newspaper to remark, that it was a very wet evening, and that he hoped she did not think of going out.</p>
			<p>The discussion, however, was interrupted by the arrival of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, whose wilful obstinacy was proof against all opposition. Mabel would now gladly have retracted her promise, but Louise exacted its fulfilment, and the most that could be peaceably effected was a compromise, by which it was agreed that they should return home early. At Mabel’s earnest entreaty, seconded by that of her father, Harry was persuaded to accompany them, with the express understanding that he was at liberty to make his escape, if there was any attempt made to enlist him for future service among the theatrical corps. At the carriage door, however, they were greeted by the voices of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker and her daughter, who were comfortably ensconced on the back seat.</p>
			<p>A low exclamation of impatience escaped from Harry. “I’m off,” whispered he to Mabel; then added aloud, “there are enough of you to take care of each other, I see⁠—good night.”</p>
			<p>If Mabel felt vexed at this inauspicious commencement of the evening, this feeling was scarcely allayed by the events that succeeded. The much vaunted performance proved to be merely a rehearsal; the parts were ill-learned, the stage ill-lighted, the actors out of humor. Louise betook herself behind the scenes and mingled in the petty contentions of the rival aspirants; while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker wearied Mabel’s ears with an excited recital of Victoria’s wrongs, and her successful retaliation upon the offenders. Long before Miss Vannecker and Louise could be persuaded to depart, which was not until near midnight, Mabel had, despite her good-nature, arrived at the uneasy conclusion that her sister and friends were making her the tool of their own love of pleasure, and ceasing to feel any interest in the histrionic disputes and failures, her thoughts became occupied with compassion for her aunt and Harry, who were awaiting her at home, and sympathy for her weary coachman and restless horses, exposed to a wintry rain, and, like herself, the victims of imposition.</p>
			<p>But the vexations of the evening did not end here. A more provoking disappointment was yet to come.</p>
			<p>It was half-revealed in the triumphant expression of countenance which met her on her return home, and Mabel felt a deeper sense of regret than she would have been willing to acknowledge, when she learned that during nearly the whole of her absence, Harry and Miss Sabiah had been in the enjoyment of Lincoln Dudley’s society, listening to his rich strains of anecdote, poetry, and learning, borne, as her imagination suggested, into those regions of thought and fancy to which such a mind as his could not fail to lead the way. She even fancied there was something malicious in the relish with which Harry quoted some of his friend’s best sayings,⁠—something positively taunting in the assurance of her usually unimpressible aunt, that she would not probably have any opportunity during the winter to make the acquaintance of this uncommonly agreeable man, for that he had missed the cars by accident that afternoon, had devoted his only evening to them, and would leave for Philadelphia in the Sunday morning train.</p>
			<p>So ended a day of vexations; and Mabel’s weekly calendar of pleasure, excitement, and gratified pride, closed with a confused but certain sense of weariness, regret, and disappointment.</p>
			<p>How impossible it is to please everybody, thought she, as in the retirement of her own room, she mentally reviewed the events of the day, dwelling with peculiar bitterness upon that climax of misfortunes,⁠—the loss of Dudley’s visit.</p>
			<p>And having thus come to the conclusion that it was impossible to please everybody, she composed herself to sleep with the half-formed resolve, that henceforth she would attempt only to please herself.</p>
			<p>Happily, neither this dangerous resolve, nor the painful emotions which had given it birth, were destined to survive a night’s repose, and the Sabbath sun shone on no more radiant face than Mabel’s, and enkindled in no youthful breast more generous impulses.</p>
			<p>A deeper cloud may one day settle on her pathway, and involve her bright spirit in a deeper conflict. Well for her then, if the powers of darkness flee away at the dawn of light, while faith whispers to her burdened heart that earth has no night of trouble and despair from which the Sun of Righteousness may not at length arise with healing in his wings.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
