<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>A thousand pretty ways we’ll find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mock old Winter’s starving reign;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We’ll dress his withered cheeks in flowers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on his smooth bald head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fantastic garlands bind.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barbauld.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>About a fortnight after the period of Dudley’s return to the city, the patience of Miss Vaughan and the good nature of the whole family were put to a somewhat severe test, by an instance of Mabel’s generous but inconsiderate hospitality.</p>
			<p>Some children, at the same hotel where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy resided, were seized with a prevailing epidemic, and Mabel, hearing her sister complain of a circumstance which threatened the health of the boys, cordially urged their coming to their grandfather’s, to remain until the danger of infection should have passed. The little fellows were delighted to exchange the restrictions of the nursery for the freedom they enjoyed in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s spacious house, and their mother was only too eager to take advantage of a proposal which freed her from a most unwelcome responsibility. They came at once, therefore, accompanied by Lydia Hope, who, in spite of her abrupt dismissal, still continued in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s service. Louise’s temper being always subservient to her selfish convenience, Murray’s pleadings had scarcely been needed to induce her to retain in her employment a girl of such unquestioned capability as Lydia; and although it was only by the exercise of great self-control that the latter could receive her mistress’ concession in a becoming spirit of gratitude and humility, she felt amply repaid for the effort, in the opportunity now afforded her of spending some weeks in the home of her youthful benefactress.</p>
			<p>This invasion of the domestic peace was, at first, endured with a very good grace by the whole household; but Murray’s riotous behavior, and Alick’s dogged obstinacy, soon gave rise to difficulty and disturbance. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan escaped the annoyance by shutting himself up in his library, and Harry, after amusing himself awhile by sharing the boys’ noisy sports, exciting their spirits, and often involving them in quarrelsome disputes, would hurry out of the house, leaving others to reap the fruits of the mischief which he had sown. Miss Sabiah and the much tormented servants were the chief sufferers from the introduction of these unruly and rebellious inmates; for Mabel, when not engrossed with other objects, seldom failed to find pleasure in the companionship of her young guests. It was true, she was often called upon to quiet the disputes and reconcile the disagreements which were continually arising, but she had a happy, careless way of settling every vexed question to the satisfaction of all parties; and by a mingling of kindness and authority she contrived to exercise a certain degree of government over her little nephews.</p>
			<p>This restraining influence was due, in part, to the respect which her consistent truthfulness inspired in children who had hitherto been subjected to a system of artifice and bribery, and still more to the cordial interest with which she occasionally entered into their plans and participated in their enjoyments; for, preöccupied as her mind might be, nothing could dispel her earnest love of childhood and her sympathy in its pleasures.</p>
			<p>Thus a long-talked-of sleigh-ride, to which the boys had been looking forward from the commencement of the winter, was anticipated with scarcely less zest by Mabel; and the snowstorm, which was its precursor, was hailed by her, as well as by the children, with unfeigned satisfaction.</p>
			<p>It commenced falling at dusk, and the next morning the entire city was decked in a rich garb of white, untrodden snow, which certainly presented a tempting prospect to pleasure-seekers, of all ages. Before noon, Broadway and the principal avenues were thronged with sleighs of every shape and hue, which, with their joyous occupants and eager, prancing horses, gave to the scene the aspect of a Carnival; while among the many rich and gorgeous equipages, none was to be seen more graceful in its style, or more complete in its appointments than that which contained the happy, blooming Mabel and her triumphant and excited little companions.</p>
			<p>They glided rapidly up and down the principal thoroughfares, threading a swift course among the crowd of huge, open omnibuses, gay with decorations and laden with passengers; fashionable turn-outs, with liveried servants, and rich draperies of fur; miniature boats, drawn by fast horses, and driven by fast young men;⁠—in a word, vehicles of all descriptions, and every grade of pretension, thus suddenly introduced upon the scene of action, and rivalling one another in beauty, grotesqueness, display, or speed.</p>
			<p>“See!” cried Murray, springing to his feet in the enthusiasm of his joy, “there’s mamma, with Miss Vannecker, in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle’s new sleigh. Drive faster, Donald!” shouted he to the coachman, “drive faster, and see if we can’t beat those gray horses ahead!” and as they dashed gaily past <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s party, and, one after another, distanced all competitors, Mabel was obliged to grasp the arm of the excited child, lest in the exuberance of his spirits he should lose his balance and be thrown from the sleigh.</p>
			<p>“Look, aunt Mabel,” exclaimed the equally observing, but more composed Alick, “look at that beautiful little white seashell that seems to be cutting through foam; the wolf’s robe, the horse, and even the harness, as white as the snow itself. Oh, that is the handsomest of all! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley is driving, and he sees us, I am sure he does,⁠—he is trying to catch up!”</p>
			<p>“But he can’t?” cried Murray, whose attention was attracted by this new rival, “I’ll bet he can’t beat our bays, won’t you, aunt Mabel?”</p>
			<p>“He will, though,” said Alick, who was carefully measuring the chances.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s heightened color and kindling eye betokened the interest with which she watched the race, but she was far from sharing Murray’s disappointment when the snow-white steed gradually gained upon them; and if she experienced any mortification at the consciousness of approaching defeat, there certainly was no evidence of it in the brilliant smiles with which she welcomed Dudley, as the little equipage finally came alongside.</p>
			<p>The latter, on his part, seemed indisposed to make any show of success; but, satisfied with having thus achieved a parallel position, continued, in spite of obstacles, to maintain it for some minutes; a species of compromise which, flattering and agreeable as it might be to Mabel, was far otherwise to her impetuous little nephew, who, still anxious to achieve a victory, persisted in exclaiming to the coachman, “Hurry up, Donald!⁠—whip ’em up!”</p>
			<p>The man, however, who read a contradictory order in the expression of his mistress’ countenance, as she responded to Dudley’s congratulation upon the pleasures of the day, forbore pressing his horses to the top of their speed,⁠—a fact of which Murray soon became conscious. “See here, Al!” exclaimed he, after an interval which he had occupied in clumsily moulding a snow-ball, for which a huge drift furnished the material, “I’ll make ’em go!” Then, watching an opportunity when Mabel was most deeply engrossed with some object to which Dudley had directed her attention, he raised himself upon the front seat, and flung his missile at the head of one of the horses. His aim proved as accurate as its effect was instantaneous. The spirited and startled animal gave one wild leap, then dashed suddenly forward; and the panic being thus communicated to its mate, the pair were, in an instant more, rushing madly down the wide avenue, clearing for themselves a passage through the quickly-parting throng of vehicles, but utterly beyond the control or guidance of the coachman.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, in another part of the city, and under circumstances of a wholly different character, a pair of watchful, thoughtful eyes were busily engaged in scanning the various individuals and scenes which came within the scope of the observer’s vision. It was a limited prospect, of no very inviting nature; but, such as it was, little Rose Hope had found in it material for thought and study during many a long year. The dingy shop, which constituted her mother’s principal support, was situated in a narrow street, and the floor of the sunken building was considerably below the level of the sidewalk. Thus, the cheerful sun, which rose behind the house, and set behind that on the opposite side of the street, never found its way into the close, cellar-like apartment where the Widow Hope sold needles, tape, and various other articles of trifling value, including candy of her own manufacture.</p>
			<p>There were two windows to this room, both fronting the street. One contained samples of the widow’s scanty stock in trade, arranged and re-arranged many times a year, for the purpose of producing a more marked effect upon her patrons, but seldom diminished by an active custom, or increased by dint of surplus capital. A few cards of buttons, discolored by exposure, or soiled by time; a few clay pipes, in an earthen mug, which had long been deficient in a handle; with here and there a paper of pins, a skein of coarse thread, or a last year’s almanac, sufficed to give the public an intimation of what might be found within.</p>
			<p>Besides these articles of positive significance, there were some little attempts at ornament, which should not be omitted, as they constituted the more marked tokens of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope’s establishment. These were two clumsy wooden figures,⁠—the one representing a parrot, gorgeous in green and yellow paint, which, in aristocratic and proud disdain of its unworthy surroundings, seemed to challenge the passer-by to remove it to a more congenial sphere; the other, a laughing, portly, old sailor, who, with his hands on his sides, and his feet in the position for commencing a hornpipe, appeared resolved to be jolly, in spite of circumstances.</p>
			<p>But the parrot had maintained its dignity, and the sailor his light-heartedness, for years, without this commendable perseverance having won a purchaser for either.</p>
			<p>These decorations were hung out as symbols for the public generally; but for the immediate neighborhood, the opposite and ungarnished window had a deeper and far more impressive meaning; for here might invariably be seen the little armchair of the invalid child, whose emaciated face was as familiar as the day, to every individual who frequented the narrow street.</p>
			<p>Few were so indifferent, so thoughtless, or so hurried, as to pass the widow’s shop without bestowing a kindly glance upon one who was the object of universal love and compassion. Little children, on their way to school, paused a moment to look smilingly up at the well-known window, assured of an answering smile in return; old women pressed their faces against the glass and spoke a word of inquiry or kindness; and hard-faced men assumed a softened air while they exchanged some friendly signal with Rosy. Or if, as was sometimes the case, the arm-chair was vacant for a day, many an eye missed the little invalid from her accustomed place, and peering anxiously into the room beyond, wondered how it fared with the child.</p>
			<p>Thus, a good understanding had come to subsist between Rose and the humble neighborhood in which she lived; and, who shall measure the priceless value of that chain of tender, though often unspoken friendships, which the force of human sympathy had wrought from out the hard material of busy life?</p>
			<p>More numerous than usual were the tokens of pleasure and congratulation which greeted her on the morning after the snow-storm. For some days past she had been absent from the window, confined to her bed in the little room behind the shop; but this bright morning found her better, and her re-appearance was observed and hailed with general satisfaction.</p>
			<p>The men who were removing the snow from the sidewalks, paused now and then, and leaning on their shovels looked up, as if to bespeak her approbation of their work; the women who came out with their pitchers to meet the noisy milk-boy, nodded a kindly good-morning, as they caught sight of her welcome countenance; and the milk-boy himself, despite his somewhat surly countenance, forbore the customary harsh cry as he paused at the shop door, and patiently awaited the widow’s coming, whistling in the meantime a popular air, and glancing good-naturedly up at Rosy, as he thrashed his arms to and fro to keep himself warm.</p>
			<p>These and many other familiar greetings were responded to by Rose, with her usual touching smile; but now and then some simple incident served to call up a deeper glow of animation or pleasure. Such was the appearance of a little deaf and dumb child, who was in the habit of daily presenting himself at her window, tapping on the glass to attract attention, then making various gesticulations of delight when Rose feigned a sudden surprise at seeing him, and whose happiness on this morning, reached its climax upon his being summoned within to receive a bit of crisp, brown candy, which she had begged for him from her mother. The little fellow was one of Rose’s most devoted friends; and, among those with whom she had never exchanged a word, he had but one rival to her partiality. This was a tall and rosy-faced youth, the driver of a heavy team, which, punctual to a moment, might be regularly seen emerging from beneath an opposite arch-way.</p>
			<p>On the present occasion the passage was so much impeded by snow as to create some doubt in Rosy’s mind, whether the young teamster might not be deterred from venturing forth to his daily duties. But no; just as the clock struck eight, the spirited leader appeared in sight, flinging the snow like powder from his hoofs, and tossing his wavy mane as if in defiance of obstacles. The sun, which never shone on Rosy’s side of the street, was reflected in glittering rays from the brazen knobs that ornamented the head-piece and bridle of the noble animal and which, thickly set and polished to the last degree, dangled and glistened like a dandy’s watch-chain. Not a whit less proud were the step and bearing of the shaft-horse, a fit companion and a perfect match to the tall and well-shaped leader; and both, in truth, formed a striking contrast to the broken-down and half-starved hacks which performed most of the draught labor of the city. Rose had watched and hailed their approach for so many successive days and months, that she had come to feel a sort of ownership in the handsome pair; a sentiment which acted, perhaps, as a bond of sympathy between her and their smart young driver, who took no small pride in their fine forms, glossy coats, and perfect training. There was something healthy and cheery about the whole establishment, and especially in the ruddy face of the teamster, who, standing upright and firm, issued punctually from beneath the archway, a fit type of honest labor coming forth to its daily toil.</p>
			<p>The horses always made their exit with a slow and stately pace, but the moment they gained the street the lad would crack his long cart-whip, with a sound which made the neighborhood ring, but which was a token of his coming intended for Rosy’s ear, if one might judge by his cheerful smile and wave of the hand in the direction of her window, while the horses, which seldom suffered from the application of the lash, pricked up their ears as if at the sound of music, and broke into a brisk and voluntary trot.</p>
			<p>To Rosy, who had no opportunity of seeing the costly equipages which were thronging the great avenues of the city, and the courteous salutations which were being exchanged in the world of fashion, there was nothing more imposing than the bearing of these working steeds, nothing more truly kind and courtly than the demeanor of her assured friend, the healthy and robust teamster.</p>
			<p>The passage of this and many similar vehicles, however, of clumsy construction, and moving on wheels in defiance of the snow, soon had the effect of marring the purity and roughening the surface of the streets in this, the business quarter of the city, and the view became gradually less fair to the eye than even on ordinary occasions. The day was wearing towards noon, and Rosy’s eyes, dazzled by the snow and weary from past sleeplessness, were closed in momentary slumber, when she was startled by a rushing noise, accompanied by the sound of bells in rapid motion, and a sudden cry of alarm. In a moment more a pair of unmanageable horses might be seen rushing furiously down the street, dragging after them a light but richly ornamented sleigh, gay with showy trappings and the rich dresses of its occupants. It was in vain that the skilful coachman endeavored to guide the frightened animals, which bounded forward in uncontrolled terror, threatening the destruction of the whole party. As they approached the widow’s shop their driver made a final effort to check their progress, by turning them suddenly under the opposite arch-way, but the attempt was ineffectual; they bounded aside, bringing one of the runners of the sleigh upon a heap of bricks which lay, just beyond the sidewalk, deceitfully covered with snow, and the vehicle was at once overturned. Fortunately, however, for its inmates, they were all, with the exception of the coachman, who still clung to his reins, thrown upon a soft snow-bank in front of the shop door, and thus escaped wholly uninjured.</p>
			<p>A young lady, who was no other than Mabel, was upon her feet in an instant, and, without pausing to shake the snow from her garments, she hastened to the assistance of Murray, who, half buried in snow, was screaming lustily, but making no effort to rise. Alick, however, who had, from the first moment of alarm, shown a manly degree of courage and composure, had already dashed the snow from his own clothes and bounded off to recover Mabel’s muff, which was tossed to some little distance, and the ostrich feather, which had escaped from Murray’s hat, and was borne by a gust of wind rapidly down the street.</p>
			<p>“Why, what a splendid fall we have had, and how beautifully we came down in the snow, didn’t we, Murray?” exclaimed Mabel, speaking in a gay tone for the encouragement of her little nephew, and at the same time lifting him from his soft resting-place to the side-walk; then, as he still continued to cry so loudly as to attract the attention of a crowd of people who were rapidly collecting around the scene of the accident, she hastily lifted the latch of the widow Hope’s door, hesitating whether or not to seek shelter within. At the same moment she caught sight of Rosy, looking eagerly from the window and beckoning, as if inviting them to enter. This hospitable indication decided her; and, leading Murray by the hand, and calling to Alick to follow, she stepped quickly into the shop,⁠—too quickly, indeed, for, in her haste, she failed to perceive the little step downward from the side-walk, and would have fallen but for the support afforded by the door-latch, while Murray, startled by the loud ringing of the shop bell, and stumbling at the unexpected descent, was thrown head-foremost upon the floor. This inauspicious entrance alarmed the widow Hope, whose slow movements now brought her upon the scene, where her offers of assistance proved very acceptable. The little party indeed, in spite of their recent deliverance from danger, were in a somewhat deplorable condition. Murray was, in reality, slightly bruised by his second fall, and, although he could scarcely cry any louder than he had done before, he made as much tumult as possible, and required all Mabel’s attention. It was almost unconsciously, therefore, that the latter was relieved of her cloak, now dripping with the fast melting snow, and it was not until the child was somewhat quieted that she even thought of attempting to remove her delicate gloves, which, thoroughly soaked, were clinging obstinately to her half-frozen fingers. Her bonnet, also, was so crushed as to be almost shapeless, Murray had lost a shoe, and Alick, although he made no complaint, had grazed his knee against the pavement, which he had struck in falling.</p>
			<p>These causes of discomfiture, trifling as they were, created no little excitement in the contracted limits which the shop afforded; and for some minutes a general confusion prevailed, of which Rose was a silent spectator, her infirmities disabling her from being of any service. A chair was at length procured from the back room for Mabel, who, disencumbered of bonnet and cloak, soon made herself quite at home, with Murray sitting on her knee, and now gradually becoming soothed and quiet. Alick declined a low seat which was offered him, and, stationing himself directly opposite Rose, stood gazing at her with unmistakable wonder and curiosity.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s only anxiety now was for the safety of the coachman, who soon, however, appeared at the door unharmed, but presenting a rueful countenance, as he informed her that his master’s sleigh lay an utter wreck upon the sidewalk.</p>
			<p>“No matter, Donald,” answered Mabel promptly, “since we are all safe.”</p>
			<p>“But what shall be done, Miss Mabel?” inquired the man; “how will you get home?”</p>
			<p>“What has become of the horses?” asked Mabel, with difficulty restraining a smile at the man’s utterly disconcerted countenance.</p>
			<p>“They are just at the end of the street, Miss, at a poor kind of a livery, but there isn’t a sleigh to be had hereabouts⁠—none, sartain, that would be fit for you and the young gentlemen. I’m afeard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harry will be a good deal disappointed, Miss, when he sees what a smash-up we’ve had down yonder.”</p>
			<p>“O, never mind that,” said Mabel, good-naturedly; “you did the best you could, Donald. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harry will be only too glad to see us home in safety.” And having learned that the horses were uninjured, and quite sobered from their recent fright, she suggested that Donald should lead them back to their stable, inform the family of what had occurred, and return with the carriage for herself and the boys.</p>
			<p>The man hesitated,⁠—expressed a fear that it would take a long time to accomplish this, especially as wheels would not run well on the snow; and at the same time, looked around the dark shop, as if he considered it a very unworthy place of refuge for his young mistress; but Mabel, understanding the look, declared herself quite content to remain in her present quarters during whatever time might be required; “That is,” continued she, turning with true courtesy to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, “if our good friend will give us permission to stay so long.”</p>
			<p>The pale, rigid features of the widow assumed an expression that might be pronounced sincere, if not positively cordial, as, in answer to this appeal, she expressed in a few words her desire to accommodate, and make them as comfortable as possible in so poor a place.</p>
			<p>Thus assured, Mabel dismissed the man, calling to him, however, just as he was leaving the shop, and adding, “Donald, tell Lydia that I should like to have her come in the carriage; and ask her to bring a pair of shoes for Murray, and my cloth cloak.”</p>
			<p>“Mother,” exclaimed Rose, drawing a deep breath the moment the door was closed, and speaking as if giving vent to suppressed feeling, “Mother, it <em>is</em> her! it’s Miss Mabel!”</p>
			<p>Mabel turned and looked at the sick child in utter astonishment at this unexpected recognition.</p>
			<p>“Aunty,” said Alick, approaching Mabel’s side and speaking in a whisper, “I shouldn’t wonder if that girl was Rose⁠—Lydia’s sister Rose.”</p>
			<p>“What makes you think so?” asked Mabel, speaking aloud and glancing at Rose as she spoke.</p>
			<p>“I know it is,” answered Alick, confirming the remark by a confident nodding of his head; “she’s just so little, and sick and good, and sits all day in an arm-chair with a pillow in it.”</p>
			<p>Mabel rose and moved her seat nearer to that of Rose, at the same time displacing Murray from her knee. “Alick thinks,” said she, laying her hand on the arm of Rose’s chair, “that this is little Rose Hope; and I begin to think so, too,” added she, observing the ray of pleasure which overspread Rosy’s face at her words.</p>
			<p>The fact certainly needed no other confirmation than that expressed in the little invalid’s countenance, as she discovered the recognition to be mutual. “Only think,” exclaimed she to her mother, who was incredulously surveying her visitors, “of my seeing Miss Mabel! What will Lyddy say? O, Mother! what will she say when she comes in the carriage!”</p>
			<p>Mabel, amused and gratified at the child’s enthusiasm, hastened to express her own sense of the good fortune which had brought her to the shop of Lydia’s mother, and won that mother’s heart by the friendly interest with which she spoke of her daughter’s capability and faithfulness.</p>
			<p>Meantime Alick, contrary to his usual custom with strangers, entered into eager conversation with Rose, betraying, in a rapid series of questions, a knowledge of the sick child’s tastes, habits, and character, which, together with his unwonted sociability, astonished Mabel, who was unaware of the interest which Lydia’s description of her sister had awakened in the mind of the thoughtful boy.</p>
			<p>“Is that your slate?” asked he, glancing at one which lay on the wide window-sill, and whose well-worn frame and scanty bit of pencil attested the frequency of its use; “and is this what has been sold to-day?” he added, pointing to a neat list of figures in one corner. Then, having received an affirmative reply to both inquiries, he continued, “That’s your big Bible⁠—it’s a real old one, is’nt it? But here’s a cunning little book,” and he eagerly seized her “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Daily Food</span>,” which was seldom absent from her side, and opening at the first page commenced reading, but seemed disappointed in its contents, as he quickly threw it aside and looked about him for other objects of interest.</p>
			<p>“Don’t trouble the little girl, Alick,” interposed Mabel, who was struck with Rose’s pallor and evident feebleness; “you must remember she is sick and will not like to be tired with questions.”</p>
			<p>“O, no, no! he will not tire me,” said Rose, disclaiming such a possibility with an earnestness which seemed to beseech Mabel not to repress his curiosity.</p>
			<p>Alick’s eye now fell upon a rough wooden box, upon which he pounced with an eagerness that denoted a knowledge of its contents. “These are the jack-straws, ar’n’t they?” said he, looking inquiringly in Rose’s face, as he vainly tried to remove the cover.</p>
			<p>Rose assured him that he was right, and taking the box from his hand, she slid aside its ingenious fastening, and emptied the neat little articles upon the window sill for his easier inspection.</p>
			<p>Alick had jack-straws of his own, but they did not compare with Rosy’s in variety, number, or neatness of finish. “Here’s the bow!” exclaimed he, as if he recognized a familiar object, “it’s finished, and it’s a beauty! But where is the arrow? hasn’t Jack made the arrow yet?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, he made one last evening,” answered Rose; “but it was too slender, and it got broken; I guess he’ll make another to-night.”</p>
			<p>Murray’s attention was by this time attracted. He had hitherto stood at a distance, out of humor and disdainful, but he now came forward a few steps, and leaning on Mabel’s knee, stood on tiptoe and peered over Alick’s shoulder at the toys. Rose perceived the motion, and, gently drawing aside, made room for him between herself and the window. Alick was disposed to keep him at a distance and engross the enjoyment of the jack-straws, but yielded at once to Rose’s gentle remonstrance, “Let Murray see, too, Alick.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
