<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>The heart’s affection⁠—secret thing!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is like the cleft rock’s ceaseless spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which free and independent flows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of summer rains or winter snows.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fox-glove from its side may fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The heath-bloom fade, or moss flower white;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still its runlet, bright though small,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Will issue sweetly to the light.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Joanna Baillie.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Of Mabel Vaughan, the brilliant ball-room beauty, we have given no detailed description; merely hinting at the peculiar charms which characterized her, and leaving it to the reader’s fancy to fill out the picture, since beauty is the same all the world over, subject only to differences of taste. Mabel Vaughan at twenty-five, however, merits a less brief introduction; for time, without robbing her of youthful bloom, has developed in her traits which are less universally recognized, which are felt rather than acknowledged, and which are but the outward sign and expression of an inward truth. The face, doubtless, is the same. The complexion has lost nothing of its fairness; the full brown eye glows with as soft a light; the smile which plays around the mouth is as spontaneous and attractive; and the chestnut hair, on which Cecilia had been proud to lavish all her skill, is as rich and glossy as ever, though far less elaborately arranged. But the face is the mirror of the soul, and as such it unconsciously reveals the emotions that are passing within, and borrows from the chastened heart a serene and holy radiance, which illuminates every feature, like a halo on the brow of a saint. Thus, the light which now beams from her eye is not excited by gratified vanity, nor by flattering tongues, but by the quick fire of earnest purpose and of ardent truth the smile upon her countenance springs not from the mere effervescence of girlish spirits, but from unfailing cheerfulness and sympathy with others’ joy; the serene peace which enfolds her like a mantle, has not its source in the promise of pleasure, or luxurious ease, but in calm, confiding trust, and in the reflection of each day’s duty done.</p>
			<p>It is a balmy summer’s evening, and, with her head resting on her hand, she sits on the door-step of her father’s house, looking out upon the wide prairie, on which the moonlight falls in an unbroken sheet of silver light, giving to the long grass, as it waves to and fro in the gentle breeze, a strange likeness to the rolling swell of ocean. The prospect is vast, grand, and unbroken; the hour is a quiet one, and Mabel is lost in meditation,⁠—not in a meditation proportioned to the sublimity of the scene, though she now and then gazes into the dim distance, with reverential awe, but in simple, loving thoughts, concerning her home and its various members⁠—wondering where the boys can be, for they went fishing early in the afternoon, and whether her father may not be spending the evening with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie, and if it is not probable that her aunt, in the inner room, has fallen asleep in her chair, and what can have become of Harry, who is at home for a day, but has been out of sight for some hours. The latter subject of self-inquiry is presently set at rest, as, looking in the direction of the grove by the river bank, she sees him approaching, and some one with him. “Yes⁠—no⁠—yes, to be sure, it is Helen.” But she does not wonder at that; they are walking slowly and talking confidentially, too⁠—but neither does she wonder at that. She does wonder, however, as, on drawing near the house, Harry leaves his companion and goes off to speak with farmer James, while Helen, seeing her on the door-step, springs towards her, throws her arms around her neck, hides her cheek against hers, and sobs like a child.</p>
			<p>“Why Helen, dear Helen,” cries Mabel, in alarm, “what is the matter? Have you and Harry had a quarrel?”</p>
			<p>“No. Oh, no, we never had a quarrel in our lives,” exclaims Helen. “Dear Mabel, how I love you. I never knew until now, how much reason I had to love you!”</p>
			<p>“What! for Harry’s sake?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and for mine, and for everybody’s that loves him, and is proud of him; he has been telling me,” said she, lowering her voice to the softest whisper, “what he never told me before,⁠—how he struggled and fell, and never could have risen again but for you; how you followed him and prayed for him, and loved him, and saved him.”</p>
			<p>Helen’s tones were broken, as she uttered these few words. Mabel tried to speak, but her voice also failed her, and, for a few moments, the two girls mingled their tears.</p>
			<p>Helen was the first to recover herself. “Think how noble he has been, Mabel!” exclaimed she. “He never asked me to be his wife before. I do not believe he would have now, if⁠—if⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know,” exclaimed Mabel, with a soothing tenderness of tone; “dear child, I know!”</p>
			<p>“Papa spoke in his hearing, this afternoon, of leaving me all alone in the world,” said Helen, “and I could not bear to hear him talk so; and Harry could not bear it,⁠—and so it gave him courage to say to me to-night what he never dared say before. Oh, the coward, to think I would not trust him!”</p>
			<p>“Poor fellow, he has undergone a long probation,” said Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Five whole years,” said Helen. “Think of it! It has been so different for me; I knew all the time that he loved me, and I had so much to do for father and the people, and we have all been so happy together, hearing from Harry, and enjoying his little visits, and the time has seemed so short; and I never looked forward to the future⁠—but he, living all alone, serving out an apprenticeship to his conscience, with nobody to cheer him, and all the while dwelling on the past, and doubtful for the future⁠—O Mabel, he has proved himself a hero!”</p>
			<p>“You do not love him any the less then, Helen, for his confessions?”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed! but far, far better; he has gained a victory over himself, and is greater in my eyes than if he were the conqueror of nations.”</p>
			<p>“He has his reward,” said Mabel; “he will be able to boast of the best little wife in the world, and I of the dearest of sisters,” and she kissed her affectionately.</p>
			<p>“We ought to love one another, all of us,” said Helen, with deep feeling, as she returned Mabel’s embrace, “and the more so, because we do not know how soon it may be God’s will to part us. Oh, how our best blessings and bitterest sorrows are mingled together in this world. My dear, dear papa! I must go home to him now;” and, as Harry made his appearance round the corner of the house, she bade Mabel good night, joined him, and, putting her arm confidingly in his, walked away in the direction of the parsonage.</p>
			<p>Mabel was still sitting on the steps when Harry returned, although he had been gone an hour, for he staid to receive an old man’s blessing and the free gift of his only child. It was now his turn to claim her loving sympathy. “Mabel,” said he, as he took a seat beside her, and put his arm around her waist, “have I done wrong?”</p>
			<p>“Wrong in waiting so long, Harry, and enduring so much unnecessary suspense?”</p>
			<p>“No, in claiming Helen at last. What right have I to such a blessing?”</p>
			<p>“The right of a man who has proved himself worthy of it.”</p>
			<p>“But, ought I thus to take advantage of Helen’s guileless, simple-hearted nature? Would a less unworldly woman confide in me as she does, knowing all?”</p>
			<p>“A less unworldly woman could not appreciate your self-conquest, Harry; it is only the humble, Christian heart which can sympathize with human weakness, and rightly estimate human victories. I should not think Helen worthy of you, if she undervalued the firm and noble effort by which you have overcome evil with good. It is because she knows how to prize the hero of such a hard-fought battle, that I feel sure she can be trusted with the future happiness of my brother.”</p>
			<p>“There are few who have such encouragements for effort, and such motives for perseverance as I have had,” said Harry. “Helen’s love may be my reward, but it is yours, Mabel, which has saved me. God bless you for it! There would be more such victories among men, if there were more such sisters as mine in the world.”</p>
			<p>The failure in the health of the village pastor, and the prophetic warning of his approaching death, which had brought about the mutual acknowledgment of a five years attachment between his daughter and Harry, were followed by still more alarming signs of physical prostration, and it soon became evident that this faithful servant of God must soon be called from the sphere of his earthly usefulness. He had for many weeks ceased to officiate in his church⁠—a neat edifice recently erected by his now prosperous congregation⁠—and though his interest in the people of his affections was undiminished, his labors among them were at an end, and his duties were about to be assumed by another. This immediate choice of a successor had been made at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie’s urgent request, as it was his wish, before his departure, to see one fitted for the sacred office installed in his place; and, although now reduced to excessive feebleness, he listened with eager attention as, from Sabbath to Sabbath, he was cheered with accounts of the success with which the new laborer wrought in the vineyard of his planting.</p>
			<p>“I have left papa alone,” said Helen, one Sunday afternoon at midsummer, as she presented herself at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s door, “but he insisted upon it; he is so anxious I should hear the continuation of this morning’s discourse. Come Mabel! Alick, you are going too, I hope; your memories are better than mine, and papa will depend upon a full report of the sermon.”</p>
			<p>Mabel and both the boys at once rose to accompany her; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan took his hat and cane, and, in an absent way, offered Helen his arm⁠—he was such a gentleman still in spite of cares and years; but Sabiah, contrary to custom,⁠—for she was usually a regular attendant at church,⁠—expressed no wish to go, even resisted a little persuasion, and was left at home alone.</p>
			<p>She sat listening until the last sound of the church bell had died away into silence, then rose, went to the door, and watched until the last straggler had entered the church, which was just within sight; and finally, when all was still, calm, and peaceful, put on her black bonnet, took her old-fashioned parasol, and prepared for a walk. First, however, she crept quietly into the milk cellar, lifted from under a cover a little cottage cheese, which her own hands had made the day before, and covering it with a snowy napkin, carried it carefully in her hand. To whom could she be going? and for whom could the choice and delicate preparation be intended?</p>
			<p>It was one of those rare summer days when all nature seems wrapt in the luxury of repose. There was scarcely a breath stirring in the air, the wild flowers scarcely bent on their slender stalks, the grass could not be seen to wave. The birds in the thicket by the river had forgotten to sing; even the hum of the insects under foot seemed an almost unconscious murmur. All around was quiet and beautiful, wrapt in the holy hush of a summer Sabbath; why, then, was there such a restless beating, such an impatient flutter, in the heart of the lonely woman, who, with an unequal step, was pursuing the narrow path across the village green? Perhaps she was thinking of such Sabbath days, long, long ago,⁠—of such pleasant strolls across a village green, when she was not alone; perhaps, as she carefully handled the plate which held the little cheese, she was reminded of some loved friend who had been wont, in times long past, to esteem this work of her hands a luxury; or perhaps she was recalling the words with which beloved lips had been heard to praise her skill. Whatever might be the thought, it was one so all-engrossing, that she heeded not the heat of the burning sun beating down upon her head, and was unaware of the trembling of her aged limbs, until at length she stood hesitating in the shade of a blooming locust tree in front of the minister’s dwelling.</p>
			<p>The open door led directly into the principal room of the house, a cheerful, pleasant apartment, at once the study of the father, the sitting-room of his child, and the favorite resort of the young and old of his parish.</p>
			<p>Now, for the first time, however, Sabiah stood upon its threshold, and looking in, beheld the form of the feeble invalid, wrapped in a calico dressing-gown, and seated in an arm-chair, his head carefully propped up by pillows. His back was towards her, his eye fixed upon the window opposite which he sat, and his thoughts soaring into those blue heavens, at which he gazed through a net-work of woodbine and fragrant roses now in full bloom. Beside him lay a number of holy books, and a volume of sacred hymns was open on his knee.</p>
			<p>Sabiah knew not how long she had stood silently within the room, when the rustling of her dress, the reflection of her shadow, the sigh which escaped her, or, possibly, only the instinctive consciousness of human presence, caused the invalid to turn his head slowly round, and their eyes met. A look of sweet benignity overspread the pale face; he held out his thin, transparent hand; she laid her burden gently on the table, and, coming forward, took the offered hand in her own withered palm, murmuring, “Reuben!”</p>
			<p>“Sabiah!” said the aged man with a glance of touching tenderness, “this is kind.”</p>
			<p>Not another word was spoken,⁠—but he lifted the pile of books from the chair close beside him, and Sabiah, comprehending the action, sat down, with her hand still locked in his.</p>
			<p>“I have been thinking all day,” said he, at last breaking the expressive silence, “of a Sabbath like this, many years ago when we both were young. Do you remember that July afternoon when you wore the bonnet trimmed with blue, and we sat together in the choir, and the last tune sung was ‘<span epub:type="se:name.music">Arlington</span>.’? We walked home, I know, through the meadows, and sat down under the walnut tree, and spoke but little, and yet were very happy; we loved one another then, Sabiah.”</p>
			<p>“We did, Reuben.”</p>
			<p>“It seemed good in the sight of God that our earthly paths should lie widely apart; it has seemed good to Him, also, that we who rejoiced in each other’s affection in the morning of our days, should clasp hands once more in friendship at life’s solemn close. How precious the thought, that there shall dawn for us both a brighter morning, when those who have truly loved one another shall be once more united where there are no more partings.”</p>
			<p>“Life is a hard journey, Reuben,” said Sabiah; then added with a half-complaining sigh, “I trust it leads to rest.”</p>
			<p>“It is hard, my dear friend,” said the good clergyman, bestowing on her a look of half-anxious, half-pitying interest, “but the soul’s true rest may yet begin below. Our painful discipline is lost upon us, unless it teaches meek submission to God’s will; but a patient confidence in His love is rest, and joy, and peace to the burdened soul.”</p>
			<p>“You have found that rest, Reuben?”</p>
			<p>“I have, Sabiah, but only through the struggle of a bitter and early disappointment; without the trial, comes not victory, nor without the cross, the crown. Once found, however, it is an all-sufficient balm, and let every other consolation perish, that precious love will atone.”</p>
			<p>“I will seek it,” said Sabiah.</p>
			<p>“Do so,” exclaimed the old man, “and I pray God,” he added fervently, “that His peace may descend upon you like the heavenly dew.”</p>
			<p>There was another long pause, like the first; then Sabiah made a movement to rise.</p>
			<p>“Must you go?” said the sick man quietly. “It is very sweet and pleasant to feel that you are here beside me. I even forget to speak, my mind is so busy with the past.”</p>
			<p>Sabiah, even more hesitating and irresolute than usual, sank back into her seat.</p>
			<p>“Time has laid his hand on both our heads, Sabiah,” said the old man, “but the heart is true to its tender memories. I have loved and lost a good and faithful wife since our youthful days; but now, in the evening of my life, the thought of her has been strangely mingled with the memory of an earlier love. A few days more, and one of us shall depart and be no more seen; but true affection is not a thing of time, and I cannot but hope this renewal of sacred ties may be sanctified to us both. God bless you, Sabiah! You were very kind to come.”</p>
			<p>“I am very glad I came, Reuben,” said Sabiah; “I felt I must see you once more.”</p>
			<p>“Farewell, dear friend,” said he, for she had again risen to go, “we shall meet again beyond yonder blue vault of heaven.” He pressed her withered hand to his thin, sunken lips,⁠—they exchanged one more farewell⁠—and she passed slowly out of the house.</p>
			<p>Turning in his arm chair, he watched her retreating figure as she re-crossed the green, then looked upward, and breathed a silent prayer. She entered the door of her home, wiped a tear from each dim eye, and sat down in her accustomed seat.</p>
			<p>The romance of her life was over, but not so its mighty influence. Thenceforth her heart, already softened towards humanity, was subdued towards God, and from the solitary rock in the desert there gushed forth a fountain of calm, religious joy.</p>
			<p>All around her felt it, but none knew the source of this well-spring of heavenly peace, for the ancient lovers passed away, and no one shared their secret.</p>
			<p>Not until Helen came to bring back the plate and napkin, was Sabiah reminded of the cottage cheese which, without a word of explanation, she had left on the pastor’s table.</p>
			<p>“Papa enjoyed your cheese so much, Aunt Sabiah,” said the unconscious girl; “it is the only thing he has relished for a week past.”</p>
			<p>Mabel lifted her large, brown eyes inquiringly to her aunt, but Sabiah made no reply, and the circumstance was forgotten, save that the thought passed through the mind of Mabel, “how illness excites one’s sympathy,⁠—even Aunt Sabiah, it seems, has done her part in ministering to dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie, whom she always used to avoid in his healthier days.”</p>
			<p>A few weeks more, and the good pastor was laid in the village church-yard; and, shortly after, a weeping-willow was planted above his grave; but it was never suspected whose trembling hands had placed it there.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
