<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At wisdom’s gate, and to simplicity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where no ill seems.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Milton.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Several weeks passed away, during which Mabel continued to enjoy an almost uninterrupted round of gaiety. A city belle, however, should, notwithstanding the precautions of modern luxury, be possessed of a constitution insensible to every injurious influence; and Mabel, despite her usual high health, was not proof against the combined effects of excitement, exposure, and fatigue. A sudden cold, accompanied by feverish symptoms, compelled her, at length, to forego all society, save that which her home afforded; and now for the first time, perhaps, did she learn to estimate the full extent of that solicitude of which she was the cherished object. Her father’s affectionate anxiety, her aunt’s assiduous and patient nursing, and Harry’s brotherly attention and devotedness, far outweighed the gratification derived from the numerous bouquets and notes of condolence which covered her dressing-room table; and during a few days of positive illness, and a week of convalescence, she had an ample opportunity of appreciating the value of those domestic blessings and privileges, which had hitherto been obscured by the more brilliant pleasures of fashion and the world.</p>
			<p>This temporary and forced seclusion from society occurred, too, at the time when Mabel was first beginning to be conscious of the monotony which existed in those gay circles, which to Louise constituted the world. A certain fondness for admiration, and a natural gratification at the large share of it which her position and charms excited, had served for a time to blind her to the insipidity of the sources from whence it was bestowed; and the attractions of dress, excitement, and display, enlisted her interest so long as they continued to be novelties. But she had too much freshness of feeling to find any lasting pleasure in the same unvaried round of engagements, especially as her intellect occasionally rebelled at the endless repetition of ball-room nonsense, which constituted the conversation of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s set.</p>
			<p>The power of habit is strong, however, and she probably would not have had the force of will to break through the charmed ring of fashion, had not necessity laid its iron hand upon her. Her cheerful and loving disposition now found the means of both receiving and conferring pleasure in her home, and her conscience more than once reproached her for previous neglect of the spot, to which her presence, even as an invalid, evidently had the power to impart sunshine.</p>
			<p>Aunt Sabiah was like a new being, now that she had the happiness of Mabel’s society and the occupation of officiating as a nurse. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan went later to his office in the morning, and passed his evenings with his family in the library, where the numerous charts, which usually engrossed his mind, were never once unrolled. As for Harry, he seemed suddenly relieved from his wonted press of convivial engagements, and found time to read aloud to his aunt and Mabel, translate German songs for the latter, and entertain himself and torment Sabiah by rallying her upon the subject of the ill-shaped stockings which constituted her favorite knitting work, and which, although displaced in the parlor by some more elegant employment, were gladly resumed in the retirement of an invalid’s room. Their distorted calves and shrivelled ancles afforded Harry’s fancy continual play, as to the sort of animal for whose use they might be intended; and although he never called forth any other than the invariable retort, that “it was a poor leg that wouldn’t shape its own stocking,” he seemed quite contented to have the war of wits all to himself. So happy was he, apparently, under this new order of things, that he seldom left the house for any great length of time, except when warned away by the arrival of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, who made a daily visit of bustle and inquiry, and the rattling of whose flounces was usually the signal for her brother to walk off, whistling an opera air.</p>
			<p>Louise was half provoked at the contentment with which Mabel submitted to a week’s imprisonment; more especially as she felt herself in some degree called upon to enliven her seclusion now and then with her presence, a species of self-sacrifice which she found intolerably irksome. She always contrived, however, to make some plausible apology for the shortness of her visits, and came and went with such graceful ease, and so many affectionate inquiries and complimentary messages, that Mabel was very naturally gratified by her attentions, and far from disposed to question her sincerity.</p>
			<p>But the very circumstance which repelled <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, opened a new source of happiness to her children, who now, for the first time, began to enjoy the privileges of a grandfather’s house. Mabel sent for them occasionally during her short illness; and though Harry thought it a bore to have Alick poring over a book in the corner of the room, or staring moodily out of the window, and aunt Sabiah was sure that Murray’s noise would throw Mabel into a fever-fit, these visits served, on the whole, to establish natural relations between the boys and the different members of the family, and to sow the seeds of that future influence which each was destined to exercise upon all the rest. How far this experience of domestic joys, with the reflections and sentiments to which it gave rise, might have served to divert Mabel’s mind from the enjoyments of gay life, and dispose her to serious and lasting considerations of her own responsibilities and powers, it is impossible to determine; for by the time she was restored to health, and consequently to society, a new weight was added to the scale of influence heretofore possessed by the outward world, and a new sentiment engrossed both her intellect and heart, to the exclusion of all rival claims.</p>
			<p>Lincoln Dudley returned unexpectedly to the city, and Mabel met him under circumstances calculated to encourage and increase the romantic interest she had long cherished for her brother’s friend.</p>
			<p>A birth-night ball was given by one of her young friends, who, not content with urging Mabel’s attendance, both by note and message, came herself to protest against the disappointment of being refused. Mabel had not been exposed to the evening air since her illness, and the invitation was only accepted with the proviso, on the part of her father, that she should not dance. Louise declared that, under such conditions, it would be better to stay at home; but Mabel, with her usual amiability, was glad to gratify her friend on such easy terms.</p>
			<p>She was surrounded by a gay group of flatterers, when she first caught sight of a gentleman, who, leaning against a mantelpiece with an easy and self-possessed air, appeared to be leisurely scanning the assembly. Perhaps there was a magnetic power in those dark, dreamy eyes, for, at the moment when Mabel glanced at the spot where he stood, they were fixed upon her with a glance of scrutiny as well as admiration. When she next observed him, however, he was conversing in an animated manner with a sprightly lady, who evidently found great pleasure in his conversation.</p>
			<p>Had his previous criticism of Mabel been less marked, he could scarcely have failed to engage her attention, he was so very unlike any one she had ever met before. His personal appearance was striking, for, although scarcely of the medium height, his figure was well-formed and graceful, while his attitude and manners denoted an independence, and a freedom from conventional restraint, which distinguished him amid the company as one who could venture to dispense with the minor rules of etiquette. Nevertheless, he was courtly in his demeanor, especially towards ladies, and had evidently the power of making himself generally agreeable⁠—for, as Mabel continued her observations, she could not fail to remark the eager reception which his civilities met with from persons of various ages and tastes.</p>
			<p>He soon disappeared amid the crowd, however, and the thoughts of the city belle were once more engrossed by the little throng of admirers who were congratulating themselves upon her reäppearance in society, and who remained true to their allegiance, in spite of the music and dancing in an adjoining saloon.</p>
			<p>It was with some surprise, therefore, that she felt the light touch of a fan upon her shoulder, and turning, found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy beside her, accompanied by the stranger, who had evidently sought Louise for the purpose of obtaining an introduction to her sister.</p>
			<p>Either Louise, in her haste to return to the dance, failed to pronounce his name in an audible tone, or a little confusion on Mabel’s part prevented her catching the sound distinctly; at all events, she remained quite in ignorance of the fact that she was making the acquaintance of Dudley.</p>
			<p>The self-possessed serenity of his manners, however, quickly restored her wonted composure; and she knew not how it was, that before many minutes she found herself engaged in a conversation wholly free from the restraint usually consequent upon an abrupt and hasty introduction. Neither did she attempt to account for the fact that, one after another, even the boldest among her attendant beaux retreated to the ball-room or elsewhere, leaving Dudley in full possession of the field.</p>
			<p>She only knew that she was listening to one, who, in beauty of language, originality of thought, and play of fancy, was, in comparison with those who had just left her side, like a being of a different order in nature; and, flattered at finding herself the object of attraction to a superior mind, and inspired, perhaps, by the glance of Dudley’s eloquent eyes, she felt conscious of mental aspirations which her intercourse with society had never before awakened. Finding that she did not dance, Dudley obtained a seat for her, and leaning against an opposite window-frame in his wonted easy and half-indolent attitude, continued to exert his own brilliant powers of conversation, at the same time emboldening her, by his apparently careless address, to do justice to that native grace and force of intellect with which she was amply endowed.</p>
			<p>Not until <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, who chanced to be present on this occasion, came to inform her that the carriage was waiting, and Louise also in readiness to depart, did she realize the length of time in which she had been so agreeably entertained; and, although the acquaintance of an evening only, she could not conceal from herself the satisfaction she felt at Dudley’s parting assurance that he hoped to have the pleasure of soon seeing her again.</p>
			<p>Harry, contrary to expectation, had not made his appearance; detained, as it proved, by some friends whom he met at his club; and it was not until the next day at dinner that Mabel had any opportunity to speak to him concerning the occurrences of the evening. Her communications then were somewhat involuntary, and only drawn from her by pointed questions on his part. He compelled her at length, however, to acknowledge the new acquaintance she had formed, and even drew her on to give a somewhat minute description of the individual. After amusing himself with her conjectures concerning him, and especially her suspicion that he must be a poet, because he had dark eyes, was guilty of long hair, and some little eccentricities of dress, and was, moreover, very agreeable, he astonished her with the abrupt remark, “In a word,⁠—you have seen Lincoln Dudley, and the satisfaction seems to be mutual.”</p>
			<p>A glow of delighted surprise overspread Mabel’s face at the first part of Harry’s announcement, while a quickly succeeding blush betrayed her sensibility to Dudley’s good opinion. Aunt Sabiah at once became interested to learn Mabel’s opinion of one who had impressed her most favorably. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had some curiosity concerning Harry’s friend, and Harry himself was disposed to ply Mabel with further questions.</p>
			<p>But Mabel perseveringly evaded all inquiries, and at length contrived to change the topic of conversation. It continued none the less the subject of her thoughts, however.</p>
			<p>There is, perhaps, no flattery to which a young girl is so susceptible, as that of finding herself an object of interest to a man some years her senior, possessed of a superior mind, and, moreover, one of the most popular and influential members of the society in which she moves. More especially is this the case, when natural refinement of thought and feeling have fitted her for the enjoyment of more elevated and intellectual pleasures than those which are ordinarily furnished in the world of fashion. Even Louise, and the frivolous set with which she had entire sympathy, felt the honor which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley’s attentions were capable of conferring, and diligently strove to attain them; for his social standing was as confirmed as his abilities were acknowledged. How much more highly, then, might Mabel be expected to appreciate the man, who satisfied at once the demands of the most select circles, and inspired that involuntary respect which youth is ever ready to offer at the shrine of genius.</p>
			<p>Dudley’s genius, indeed, was of a most universal character. Educated mostly abroad, passing rapidly from one school of knowledge to another, viewing European society in all its phases, and profiting by opportunities which are open to but few, he had become cosmopolitan in his habits, artistic in his tastes, completely versed in the knowledge of society, and everywhere fitted to shine. Those who knew him best declared him qualified for success in whatever profession he might adopt; but, although now nearly thirty years of age, his choice was yet undetermined.</p>
			<p>Thus, at the time of his introduction to Mabel, he was still a gentleman of leisure, enjoying a moderate income, which was sufficient for the wants of one who, though fastidious and luxurious in his mode of life, was not disposed to reckless extravagance, and whose weight and influence in society were, strange to say, wholly independent of wealth.</p>
			<p>We shall soon see the effect which this uncommon influence had power to produce upon the young and enthusiastic Mabel.</p>
			<p>Her acquaintance with him ripened rapidly. His intimacy with Harry, and the certainty of a cordial reception at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s house, would alone have favored this. But, although he frequently made one of their family circle at dinner, and was received at all hours with the familiarity of a privileged guest, these were not the only occasions which afforded him the opportunity of exciting Mabel’s interest, and winning her confidence. She met him everywhere in society; and his singular powers of fascination were never more successfully exercised than when, amid the distractions of a crowded assembly, he would now and then seek her side, and, for a longer or shorter time, as the case might be, enchain her thoughts, enkindle her imagination, or excite her merriment, by drawing upon his seemingly inexhaustible stores of information, poetry, wit, and satire. He never danced; and from the period of Mabel’s introduction to him her love of this amusement became less engrossing. Not that he sought to win her from gayer pleasures by the charm of his conversation, or strove to monopolize any considerable portion of her time. On the contrary, he had too much delicacy and tact to make his attentions conspicuous; and his preference and admiration were only to be inferred from the eagerness and self-gratulation with which he availed himself of those accidental opportunities which chance or good fortune might throw in his way.</p>
			<p>But, while Mabel’s general popularity continued undiminished, and she was still the ornament and life of the ball-room, her face was never animated by a more brilliant glow than when, owing to a pause in the music, or a casual movement among the company, she found herself released from her recent partner in the dance, and brought within the magic influence which Dudley’s musical voice and eloquent eye had power to exercise upon her imaginative spirit.</p>
			<p>All the other events of the evening might well serve to minister to her vanity and self-love, but these little episodes had a deeper significance, and produced a more subtle and lasting effect upon her heart and life.</p>
			<p>A new ambition, as well as a new sentiment, had been suddenly awakened; and the young girl, who a month before could scarcely credit the triumph which had placed her beyond the rivalry of fashionable competitors, now felt a deeper thrill of gratified pride as she became conscious of those more ennobling gifts, which caused her to be appreciated by a man of rare cultivation and fastidious taste.</p>
			<p>A fresh impulse was thus given to mental powers which had hitherto lain dormant; and although the routine of her daily life underwent little change, a close observer might detect many an indication of the new direction which had been given to her motives and aims, and the unwonted interest which was imparted to every scene in which Dudley played a part.</p>
			<p>And while the charm which his presence exercised in the gayer circles effectually vanquished the hesitation with which she resumed her round of fashionable engagements, the ascendency of his empire over her thoughts was no less perceptible in her moments of retirement and meditation. The topics on which he had awakened her interest became the subject of after thought; the books from which he had quoted, frequently lay open upon her dressing-table, and the little apartment so choicely furnished by Harry was frequently resorted to for the more careful study of those works of art which possessed the merit of having been selected by Dudley.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who had been over-anxious on account of his daughter’s health, felt too deep a satisfaction in her entire restoration to complain of his deserted fire-side, and patiently betook himself to the usual resource afforded by his papers and charts. Harry, at first gratified by his friend’s evident admiration of his sister, began at length to weary of the subordinate part which he filled in relation to them both, and occasionally, in the domestic circle as well as the public assembly, would quietly absent himself from their society, without being much missed by either party. Miss Sabiah, whose prejudices were all in Dudley’s favor, forbore to utter any reproaches at the thoughtless and unintentional neglect which sometimes fell to her lot, and fostered her niece’s growing preference by the unqualified praise which she bestowed upon its object.</p>
			<p>What wonder, then, that Mabel, unquestioned, unchecked, and unwarned, lent herself without fear or doubt to the emotion of the hour? What wonder if he, whom all the world admired as the scholar, the poet, and the wit, became in her eyes the noble, the generous, the true, and the disinterested man which he should have been,⁠—but which, alas! he was not?</p>
			<p>With all his varied acquisitions,⁠—his knowledge, taste, culture and refinement,⁠—with all his appreciation of the beautiful, both in art and nature, and all the seeming fairness of a reputation which knew no stain, there yet lurked within the well-springs of his being a secret but fatal poison, dwarfing all his higher purposes, and blighting all his nobler hopes.</p>
			<p>Free from all outward forms of vice, he had, nevertheless, no true love of virtue; bowing at the shrine of female loveliness, he had no high faith in woman; and scorning the world in which he lived, he had no power to rise above it.</p>
			<p>Early distrust of all things good had palsied the noblest gifts of nature; and the life which might have been a blessing to mankind had thus far proved a failure.</p>
			<p>And shall Mabel’s trusting heart be exposed to this chilling influence? Shall the young mind yearning for truth and knowledge share the sophistries of a perverted intellect? Shall the soul open to great and lasting impressions find all its generous aspirations quenched in the cold reasoning of a false experience?</p>
			<p>Ambition, self-love, pride of heart, a deceived imagination, and a host of worldly allies, will urge her on in the dangerous path which her feet seem doomed to tread. But one shall meet them by the way, a childlike form, clad in holy faith, who shall oppose them with the gentle might of an humble heart, a pure life, and a whispered prayer. Unequal seems the contest, but it is God who giveth the victory.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
