<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 41</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>I have seen one, whose eloquence commanding</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Roused the rich echoes of the human breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The blandishments of wealth and ease withstanding,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That hope might reach the suffering and oppressed</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And by his side there moved a form of beauty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strewing sweet flowers along his path of life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And looking up with meek and love-lent duty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I called her angel, but he called her, wife.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Anon.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>It was near the close of a December day. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and his family had been now for some weeks re-established in their home, and Mabel, who, amid manifold cares and occupations, had secured one half hour of leisure, had seated herself for the last time at her little desk, in front of the familiar window which commanded a view of the wide-spreading prairie. The light busy foot of Helen was astir in the house, the voice of Melissa might be heard now and then in the adjoining kitchen, in the elated and authoritative tone of one who magnified her office. The boys were passing to and from the barn, taking a final look at their favorites among the flocks and herds, and giving their parting charges to farmer James. Everything gave token of some great event near at hand, some thorough breaking up of old ties, some grand migration among the household. The little sitting-room, however, was quiet and peaceful; business and preparation might prevail outside, but neither were permitted to intrude into this domestic sanctuary, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and his sister sat in their accustomed arm-chairs, before the fire, while the old house-dog was asleep on the rug. For a moment or two Mabel retained a thoughtful attitude, with her head resting on her hand, her eyes now straying over the wide wintry landscape without, now fixed with tender interest upon the picture of serene repose within the room; then taking up a pen, she bent over her desk and wrote the following letter:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert:</span>⁠—When I look back to the days of my childhood, there ever arises before me the image of one dear friend, whose tender love and devoted care made it a blessed and happy portion of my life, on which memory loves to dwell. When I consider the years which have since intervened, I can not fail to be reminded, that at every step I have been counselled, strengthened and cheered, by the advice, the warnings, and the lessons of this same dear friend; and now that I am about to enter upon a new sphere of duty, I feel an instinctive yearning to still claim a place in her good wishes, her affection, and her prayers. You have cherished the child, encouraged the woman⁠—let me bespeak your loving sympathy for the wife. It does not become me to say much of him to whom, to-morrow, I expect to stand in this new and near relation. Some day, I trust, you will see and know <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival, and be enabled to judge for yourself. But if genuine simplicity and true manliness of heart and life entitle a man to honor, I may well be proud of the station which he holds, both independently, and in the world’s opinion; and if strength of Christian principle is the surest foundation for confidence and trust, I may well believe that the sentiments which he now professes are sincere, and will be lasting. I trust I have not said too much; but indeed, dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, my only fear is that I am not worthy to be the object of his choice; and it is that I may become so, that I chiefly beg an interest in your prayers. Bayard (for you will wish to know him by his Christian name also) is the son of Counsellor Percival, as he was usually called, a lawyer, formerly of high standing in New York city, but now for some years deceased. His widow is still living, vigorous and active, although nearly seventy-six years of age. She, too, is well known in New York and elsewhere, for the active part she has taken in every philanthropic and benevolent scheme; nor does she, even at her present advanced period of life, feel herself excused from exertion, or unfitted for active duty. You will realize this, when I tell you that she has recently taken a house in Cambridge, with the view of furnishing a home for two of her grandsons, now students at Harvard, and that she has invited Alick and Murray also to become members of her family. No proposition could have been more opportune, so far as the boys are concerned; for Alick hopes to be prepared for admission to the University at the commencement of the next collegiate year, and Murray could nowhere pursue, to such advantage, the mathematical studies which are to fit him for his chosen profession⁠—that of an engineer. At first, we all opposed the plan, fearing Madam Percival was assuming too much care; but she over-persuaded my father and Harry, convinced me that she anticipated only pleasure from the charge, and finally carried her point.</p>
				<p>“I could have wept, as on my last visit to Lake Farm, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival’s residence, she half playfully, half solemnly, resigned to me all her responsibilities there, at the same time assuring me that nothing but her unwillingness to leave Bayard alone, prevented her from carrying into operation, nearly a year before, this cherished plan for the benefit of her grandsons. My capacity for filling her honored place at Lake Farm is not at present to be put to the test, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival has recently been elected member of Congress from this district, and we are to set out for Washington immediately after the marriage ceremony. My dear father will accompany us. I could not endure the thought of being separated from him; and he, on his part, seems to find pleasure in the prospect of a winter at the seat of government, where I hope that the milder climate will strengthen his constitution, and that the interest which he already begins to feel in the debates will employ his mind agreeably. You will be glad to hear that he has quite relinquished all business and pecuniary cares, and is in the enjoyment of a contentment and serenity which it is delightful to witness. Aunt Sabiah is to spend the winter with Harry and Helen; but next summer will, I trust, restore her to me; for I shall never relinquish my claim to this beloved member of our family. It is a fortunate circumstance for us, that, after half a dozen years of persevering effort, Melissa has at last succeeded in bringing farmer James to the point. They were married, with no little parade and ceremony, during our absence at Thanksgiving time, and will probably continue to occupy the house and the adjacent land for as many years as they see fit.</p>
				<p>“To-morrow, therefore, will be an eventful day to us all; a day when, not I alone, but all the rest of the household, will be called upon to bid farewell to that Western home, which, humble as it is, has become to us a dear and honored spot, and will be cherished in years to come, as the blessed haven of rest, which afforded us a safe and welcome shelter from the storm of adversity and trial. Blessings on its bare white walls, its plain brick hearth, its low-roofed rooms! they have taught us that happiness is independent of ornament; that contentment brings joy to the humblest fireside; and that love knows no limits and often expands the widest in the narrowest space. We may go the world over, and view with admiration its monuments of grandeur and pride; but our grateful hearts can never forget what we owe to our prairie home.</p>
				<p>“I take great pleasure in the thought, that in the approaching spring or summer, the claims of love and duty will probably call us to New England. I shall then hope to see you once more, my dear and honored friend. Meanwhile, believe me now, as ever, your tenderly attached,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Mabel Vaughan.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>In that hour of sweet anticipation and happy imagining, fancy might well robe the future in its fairest colorings, but the hope expressed in the latter clause of Mabel’s letter, was, nevertheless, destined to disappointment. Not many weeks after the receipt of these welcome tidings from her beloved pupil, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert met the great summons which awaits all the living, and when Mabel, at length, visited the home of her childhood, it was but to weep over the grave of this early friend.</p>
			<p>Not less vain too, was her fond trust, that change of climate and scene might tend to strengthen and prolong the life of her venerable parent. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s health was too much enfeebled to admit of anything more than a temporary improvement, and, although he rallied during the winter, and evidently reaped both pleasure and benefit from his residence in Washington, spring found him wasting under a slow disease, and when summer came he was like a shock of corn fully ripe. Serenely, quietly, peacefully, however, his long life drew to a close; and in his daughter’s beautiful Western home, surrounded by those whom he loved, soothed by their tender offices, and sustained and cheered by a calm and heavenly hope, he gently passed away.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Harry,” said Percival, one evening when the two friends were sitting on the verandah at Lake Farm, “I think I have heard you say that you formerly knew Lincoln Dudley.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I knew him well,” replied Harry; “what of him?”</p>
			<p>“I saw to-day, in looking over the passenger list, that he had sailed for Liverpool in the Canada. Poor fellow! he is still restlessly striving, I suppose, to get away from that worst enemy⁠—himself.”</p>
			<p>“As if it were possible,” responded Harry, “to break loose at last from the object of nearly forty years assiduous devotion! Or, if he could succeed, what a void the world would necessarily present to the man who never had a hope, or an aim, which had not ultimate reference to his own benefit.”</p>
			<p>“I have seldom known a more complete instance of perverted and wasted powers than may be witnessed in Dudley,” said Percival. “J⁠⸺, an old class-mate of his, gave Mabel and myself, last winter, a truly pitiable account of his condition. It seems he has become a most wretched dyspeptic; weighs his food with scrupulous exactness, limits himself in respect to exercise and fresh air, and analyzes his physical symptoms with morbid accuracy. His once brilliant intellect is thought to be seriously impaired, and there is every prospect of his becoming a complete hypochondriac.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed!” exclaimed Harry; “what a melancholy picture his case presents! What an object of compassion he has become; and what a warning!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied Percival, “there could be no more striking proof of the fact, that refinement, self-culture, and polished address, are worse than useless, unless accompanied by earnest faith, manly purpose, and generosity of heart. Dudley was at one time my father’s ward, and an occasional inmate of his house. I well remember the admiration which his talents and accomplishments excited in me as a boy; and I have often heard my mother regret the selfishness and vanity which had been early encouraged in him, and which were so fostered in succeeding years as effectually to steel him against her own and my father’s counsels. He is an example of a class, unfortunately too common in the world, who with the fairest prospects before them, nevertheless make shipwreck of their own fortunes, and exert an influence upon others as disastrous and fatal as it is fascinating and insidious.”</p>
			<p>“How he would once have ridiculed such a specimen of humanity as he now presents!” said Harry, musingly.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Bayard; “but ‘where fools may laugh, wise men can only weep.’ ”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>As if to prove the fallacy of earthly longings, and manifest the mysterious working of God’s providence, in less than a year after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s death, the long-talked-of road⁠—to which the old man’s thoughts had in vain turned, as the iron-bound link between his past and his present fortunes, the pathway to better days, the only hope for his own and his children’s future⁠—ceased to be the vision of soaring imaginations, and became a solid reality. The schemes and plans which had wearied the brain of the hoary man, and the failure of which had well-nigh broken his heart, were at length brought to a successful fulfilment, without the aid of his mediation; and the waste lands of the wilderness became, in time, a noble patrimony to Harry, the young Leroys, and Mabel. Not, however, until Harry’s good resolutions, his firm self-control, his patient industry, had been tested by years of privation and labor; not until Alick and Murray, one in classical pursuits, and the other in more practical studies, had won their meed of praise, nobly resisting the temptations of youth and laboring with the ardor inspired by necessity and self-dependence; not until Mabel, amid the cares which she assumed as a wife, and the responsibilities attendant upon a new scene of action, had proved herself worthy of a man whose aims were as exalted as his life was useful; and not until her noble husband had found, amid competence and frugality, a happiness to which money could bring no increase, and had earned among his fellow-men a high and honorable position to which wealth could add no dignity.</p>
			<p>To follow Mabel in her after career would be to anticipate the future. Her lot is but that of humanity; and time, while it serves to ripen and perfect her joys, must bring with it changes, anxieties, and sorrows. It may lead her through pleasant and flowery paths; it may call her to mount the hill of difficulty, and drink the bitter waters of affliction; but may we not have faith to believe, that every circumstance and every change will serve to minister to her final peace, and that earth’s short pilgrimage will prove the pathway to an eternal rest? Yes, to her, as to all who early learn life’s holiest lesson, pleasure is henceforth sanctified, anxiety relieved, and pain and disappointment robbed of their bitterest sting; while, alike amid the sunshine and the storm, the purified heart sees God,⁠—sees Him not only as the Almighty Judge, but as the Infinite Father, the source whence all those sweet affections flow which illume, and strengthen, and redeem the world: and seeing Him, believes that all the varied dispensations of His providence are alike good, since all flow from the hands of One who afflicts but in mercy, who wounds but to heal, and who, amid all life’s varied discipline, is ever proving to the eye of Faith that His banner over us is Love.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
