<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>They who have rarest joy, know joy’s true measure;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They who most suffer, value sufferings pause;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They who but seldom taste the simplest pleasure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Kneel oftenest to the Giver and the Cause.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Summer, gentle, balmy summer, had found its way even to the dreary part of the city in which Rosy lived. It came not in bright streams of sunshine, breezes heavily laden with sweets, or the music of gaily singing birds. The close, dark rows of buildings obscured the light, barred out the prospect, and interrupted the refreshing gales, while the harsh and unharmonious noises of the street alone fell on the listening ear. Still Rosy, patiently sitting at her open casement, with a soul alive to its opportunities and a heart grateful to their source, saw more of nature’s handiwork, and read in it more of God, than many a dull-eyed, thoughtless traveller who, permitted to rove amid earth’s fairest scenes, shuts his eye to their beauty and grandeur, and closes his ear to their sacred influence.</p>
			<p>The little tufts of grass which had sprung up at the corners of the opposite archway, had been watched in their growth by Rosy, ever since the first green blade obtruded between the uneven pavement and the foundation stones of the wall. The morning sun, for an hour or more, shone on them with its cheering beams, the afternoon shower refreshed them with its gentle moisture, and day by day the sick child gleaned from this her humble garden plot fresh proofs of the love of Him who watcheth over all. Within the narrow range of her vision, early vegetables and summer fruits were disposed in tempting array, each rivalling the other in its perfection and richness; and every successive luxury of the season, as it appeared in its turn, awakened in Rosy’s heart, loving and grateful thoughts of Him who is the universal and bountiful Provider. The noble team-horses, whose morning exit from the archway she hailed with a daily smile of welcome, seldom now returned at noon or nightfall without a branch of oak, willow, or birch, waving above their heads, while the glow of contentment and self-satisfaction which shone in the young teamster’s face, no less than the sprig of lilac which occasionally adorned his hat, proved that he had been engaged in more cheering labors, and among more exhilarating scenes, than those which the city afforded.</p>
			<p>The little tufts of grass were all that poor Rosy knew of green fields and verdant waysides; the early vegetables and fruits which she saw, but seldom tasted, furnished her sole experience of summer’s wealth and bounty; and the branches which waved over the heads of the heated and weary team-horses, alone afforded proof of the sweet and refreshing repose which might be found beneath the greenwood shade.</p>
			<p>But it was something to know, that somewhere beyond the city lay the country, as beyond this world the Heaven of her hopes; and imagination could sun itself in the joys of the one, as the yearning soul could long and pant for the glory, the peace, and the final rest of the other.</p>
			<p>As she watched the grass grow beneath the archway, in the sweet dreams of fancy her crippled form strayed among verdant fields and sat down by rippling streams; as she surveyed the tempting display in the green-grocer’s shop, she tasted, by means of some inward sense, rich fruits whose names she scarcely knew; as the gentle breeze waved the green boughs above the horses’ heads, she seemed to hear the soft sighing of the summer wind as it swept through the arches of a boundless forest. And when, to crown her satisfaction, the ruddy, laughing teamster gaily lifted his hat, removed the lilac branch from its crown, and flung the cluster of purple flowers into the lap of the pleased, astonished child, Cerës herself, with all her treasures, was not more richly laden.</p>
			<p>But summer, among its precious gifts, has brought no glow of health to the cheek, no renewal of strength to the limbs of the wasted girl. The close confinement of the long winter had left her more enfeebled than ever; the rough winds of the early spring had rudely pierced to the seat of her fragile life; and now, the sudden heat which has succeeded serves only to enervate still further her sunken and perishing frame. Cheerfully, serenely, hopefully as ever, the calm blue eyes are searching with their earnest, steadfast gaze, into the things which are not but are soon to be;⁠—looking into the depths of that future, no longer distant, but seemingly close at hand. Like the pilgrim who, after long wanderings, arrives at last without the walls of the promised city, and is anxious only for the morning light which shall admit him within its gates, so she, standing at Heaven’s portal, seems only to await the dawn which shall usher her in.</p>
			<p>The widow Hope moves about her little domain with the same measured, dragging step as ever, presides at her narrow counter, and displays her humble wares with the same mechanical, half-vacant air, and betrays in her demeanor a rigid, unaltered apathy of grief and disappointment. Now and then, however, her dull eye is fixed upon her child with a deep, searching glance of maternal anxiety and dread, and as she turns away and engages in some household task, a deep-drawn sigh, or half-uttered groan, gives evidence that the poor heart’s capacity for suffering is not exhausted yet.</p>
			<p>Nor is the remembrance of past happiness effaced beyond recall. The softness of the summer air, the sight of Rosy’s lilac branch, the well-known perfume of its flowers,⁠—all serve to awaken within her the recollection of days gone by. She lifts the broken-handled mug which contains the fragrant blossoms, and, as she inhales their familiar breath, a vision rises before her of her childhood’s home,⁠—the green and sloping meadow which stretched before the door, the old stone step, worn smooth by childish feet, the lilac bushes which graced it on either side, and the robins which yearly built their nests and sang there. She hears her brothers and sisters at their play, her mother’s step within the house, her father’s voice outside, and the voice of Rosy’s father whispering in her ear. It might be sad to muse on joys forever flown, but, if so, it was a pleasing sadness, for again and again she bends her careworn head over the rustic nosegay, reads in it a record of her girlhood, and turns away to muse upon the page.</p>
			<p>“O Rose!” exclaimed she, as her thoughts, after straying awhile amid the past, led her back to the stern reality of the present, “O Rose! how I wish you could go up to the old farm, if it were only for a week; your uncle Jonas would be glad to have you come, I know, and the very sight of the place would do you good!” And as the poor mother reflected on the impossibility of carrying this wish into effect, she drew the deepest sigh that had escaped her yet.</p>
			<p>Rose sighed, too⁠—a soft, low, scarcely audible sigh. If the poor child had a selfish wish on earth, it was to visit the old farm.</p>
			<p>The same bright morning which bore witness to the widow’s heart-sick despondency, and the hopelessness of Rose’s earthly longings, found the fashionable world of New York elated and eager in the prospect of a festive occasion, which promised to be as brilliant and successful as it was exciting and novel. It was the day of Fan Broadhead’s marriage with the Colonel, and after the nuptial ceremony at Grace church, the bridal party were to proceed to the bridegroom’s country residence, a few miles up the Hudson, where a grand reception of guests was to be held in the open air; the beautiful grounds belonging to the estate having been decorated and prepared in a style rarely attempted in our fickle and unpropitious climate. Everything, therefore, depended on the weather; and if sunshine and gentle breezes could have been propitiated or bribed, a more perfect day could not have cheered the hearts of the numerous aspirants after pleasure. Hair-dressers and ladies-maids were called into requisition at day-break; spring bonnets, whose exquisite array of buds and flowers had been carefully secreted until now, bloomed out of their various band-boxes; the flounces of rich silks rustled and rattled as if asserting their rival merits; and white-gloved coachmen, mounted on the boxes of freshly-varnished carriages, surveyed their own stately equipages with pride, and bestowed disparaging glances on those of their masters’ neighbors.</p>
			<p>And now, one after another, these showy establishments, decked like their occupants in all the panoply of pride, rolled in various directions from street to street, and finally swept up the wide avenue leading from the city, bearing with them the beauty, the wealth, and the fashion of the metropolis.</p>
			<p>“Mabel, what in the world can have become of Donald?” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, in an agony of impatience;⁠—a state of mind which was not improved by a sudden rent in her delicate glove, the consequence of an angry twitch on the part of the irritated lady.</p>
			<p>“I can not imagine,” replied Mabel, outwardly more calm than her sister, but betraying scarcely less annoyance, as she glanced at a clock on the mantle-piece, and then looked anxiously down the street.</p>
			<p>“We shall be too late,” said Louise, in a reproachful tone; “every body has driven by. I wish I had gone by myself. Donald is always behind the time.”</p>
			<p>Mabel made no reply, but continued gazing from the window, not a little chafed at the selfishness of her sister’s complaints.</p>
			<p>This unforeseen delay and disappointment were the result of a discovery made by Mabel’s coachman, as she alighted at the hotel where she had, according to agreement, called for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy. One of the wheels of the new barouche, a recent birth-day gift from her father, was imperfectly adjusted, and Donald declared it impossible to take the anticipated drive until the difficulty was remedied. He was suffered to depart, therefore, for this purpose, upon the assurance that he should be absent half an hour only, at the most.</p>
			<p>The time was long past, however, and still he did not return. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s childish and fretful impatience increased every moment; and Mabel, in addition to her own share of vexation, found herself the victim of Louise’s uncontrollable ill temper and unsparing invective. She should not have suffered Donald out of her sight for a moment on such an important occasion, faithless creature that he was. Or, at least, why did she not tell him to bring the close carriage instead of the barouche? he could have made the exchange in half the time that he had kept them waiting⁠—it would have been better to go in that stifled thing than not to go at all. It was no more than fair that Mabel should abide by her own poor management, but it was hard⁠—yes, she must say it was a little too hard⁠—that she also should be the sufferer by such folly. And angrily calling to Lydia to bring her a fresh pair of gloves, and harshly repulsing Murray, who accidentally trod on one end of her lace mantilla, she threw herself into a seat in a despairing attitude, and pouted and sulked for some minutes like a spoiled child.</p>
			<p>“Hark!” exclaimed she at length. “Isn’t that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle’s voice? Yes, it certainly is; he was to call here for young Van Rosberg, and Van Rosberg is gone. He was invited to act as groomsman, and went early with the bridal party.” And the next moment her light figure disappeared through the door which opened into the hall, and Mabel lost her final words, which were to the effect that there would probably then be a vacant seat in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle’s carriage. “How fortunate if it were so!”</p>
			<p>A moment after, a waiter appeared at the drawing-room door, to say that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy had gone to Riverside with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earle, and hoped Miss Vaughan would be in season to overtake them on the road.</p>
			<p>Characteristic as this manœuvre was in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, Mabel’s feelings were deeply hurt at the selfishness and unsisterly effrontery which it evinced. “I can not go now, at any rate,” thought she. “Louise knew very well that I should give it up altogether if she deserted me in this way.” And no longer anxious for the arrival of the carriage, she deliberately removed her bonnet and sat down to meditate on her disappointment.</p>
			<p>Unconsciously to herself, she had looked forward to this festivity with an interest never before awakened by any similar occasion. Not because the bride and bridegroom were at the height of fashion; not because all the world would be present to do them honor; nor because it would be for her a new opportunity to achieve conquests and triumphs: such motives and reflections had given no glow to her anticipations, and now added no sting to her disappointment. The simple thought of her heart had been, “Dudley is the bridegroom’s nephew; Dudley will be there. I shall read my triumph in his presence, and achieve in his approving smile the only conquest that I crave.”</p>
			<p>Perhaps, too, though she knew it not, her secret soul looked to him to exorcise with his eye, his voice, his smile, the spirits of disquiet and self-questioning which had for the last few days warred constantly with her peace; perhaps she trusted to his magnetic influence to hush the voice of warning, make a treaty with her conscience, and reconcile her to herself.</p>
			<p>How aggravating, then, the loss of this opportunity, the only one she could possibly expect before starting on her journey, it being Dudley’s well-known purpose to accompany the bridal party to Albany, where other festivities awaited them, and join the excursionists on their arrival at that city, which was to be the first point on their route.</p>
			<p>Whatever hopes she might have based on this long-anticipated occasion, she now found them suddenly annihilated, and herself oppressed with a painful sense of loneliness, injustice, and injury. She would have given vent to her feelings in a burst of tears, but for the presence of her sister’s children, who, while they acted as a restraint upon her, evinced at the same time a childlike sympathy in her disappointment, which touched and soothed her sensitive nature.</p>
			<p>“Has mother gone without you, auntie?” exclaimed Alick; “that’s real mean!” while Murray, climbing into a chair, stretched his head out of the window and made, every instant, eager but, as it proved, false reports of the arrival of the carriage.</p>
			<p>“Never mind, Murray, I sha’n’t go now,” said Mabel, after nearly an hour had elapsed; “it is too late.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, here it is, really,” shouted Murray, “I see Donald driving like any thing! Oh, what a splendid barouche!” and Alick, convinced that this time his brother’s announcement was to be relied upon, ran to the window and confirmed the joyful fact, by joining in Murray’s panegyric upon the gay and beautiful equipage.</p>
			<p>“Aren’t you going, after all?” inquired he, in a disappointed tone, observing that Mabel was standing behind him, gazing moodily and vacantly into the street, and making no movement to resume her bonnet.</p>
			<p>“No, Alick.”</p>
			<p>The boy hung down his head, as if a veto had been put upon some favorite scheme of his own, but Murray, conceiving a new idea, cried out, eagerly, “Then, auntie, take me to ride. Oh, do, take me a little way in the new barouche.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said Mabel, indifferently; “ask Lydia for your hat,⁠—get yours, too, Alick,” and pleased at the delight exhibited by Murray, she tried to assume a gay tone, as she said,⁠—“We will go and have a good time by ourselves.”</p>
			<p>Alick’s face brightened, as Mabel seemed thus to promise herself a compensation for being excluded from the wedding festival, and by the time they gained the carriage, the boys, at least, were both in high spirits.</p>
			<p>Donald, comprehending at once the consequences of his long delay, had a tedious story to relate in reference to its cause; but Mabel, scarcely hearing his explanation, and caring little for the trivial details which had resulted, as she deemed, so disastrously, accepted his apology in silence, and bade him drive on, purposely choosing a direction opposite to that leading to Riverside.</p>
			<p>They had proceeded but a little distance down Broadway, however, when, seized with a new idea, she suddenly altered her purpose, and requested the coachman to turn and drive home. Alick looked at her inquiringly; Murray began to whimper; but her smile re-assured them. “Only for a moment, darling,” said she, in a soothing tone, to Murray; “I shall not get out of the carriage, I wish to speak to Cecilia. Ring the bell, Donald,” said she, as they stopped before her father’s door; and as the footman appeared and ran down the steps to take her orders, she exclaimed, to the astonishment of her hearers, “ask Cecilia to bring my warm Scotch shawl and a pillow⁠—two pillows, Robert,” continued she, as he turned to fulfil her directions.</p>
			<p>The smiling Cecilia soon appeared with the articles, which were deposited in the carriage.</p>
			<p>“Are we going to be gone all night?” asked Murray, in some alarm, while Alick’s face contained a volume of questions.</p>
			<p>But Mabel only smiled in reply.</p>
			<p>“Turn here,” said she, at length, to Donald, as they reached the entrance of a narrow street.</p>
			<p>“Oh! I know, I know!” shouted the usually quiet Alick, as he observed that they were taking the direction leading to the widow Hope’s, “you are going to take Rosy out to drive.”</p>
			<p>Mabel nodded in assent.</p>
			<p>Murray sprang up and down on the carriage seat, and clapped his hands in an extasy of delight.</p>
			<p>Alick scanned his aunt’s face pensively, admiringly. Mabel almost forgot her recent and bitter disappointment, in the thought of the pleasure she was about to impart.</p>
			<p>But who shall paint the rapture of surprise, excitement, and delight, which reigned in the widow’s home, when the prancing horses were reined in before the door, when the object of their coming was announced, and the thoughtful preparations for the little invalid’s comfort placed the incredible fact beyond a doubt. Tears streamed down the cheeks of the happy, grateful child, and the undemonstrative mother so far forgot her wonted reserve as to lay her hand on Mabel’s shoulder and exclaim, “Bless your heart, she was just longing to have a peep at the country! Why, it will be like taking her to paradise!”</p>
			<p>A few moments more, and Rose, supported by pillows, and with Mabel’s shawl across her lap, was rolling down Broadway, in the easy, luxurious carriage, her thin, pale face, and slight, attenuated figure, forming a striking contrast to the rich beauty and graceful proportions of Mabel, who was leaning forward, re-arranging the cushions at her feet, and gently inquiring whether the motion of the carriage fatigued her. Rose’s eyes wandered up and down the street, taking in at a glance a thousand interesting objects, while Alick and Murray, as they watched her from the opposite seat, directed her attention now to one thing and now to another, betraying in their animated faces how deeply they enjoyed and participated in her pleasure.</p>
			<p>But city sights and sounds were comparatively familiar to Rosy, and although the drive was enlarging her knowledge and experience, nothing as yet had served to arouse emotions altogether unprecedented and novel. As they approached the battery, however, and through the arches of its lofty elms she caught sight of the deep blue waters of the bay, the white sails glistening in the sun, and the green islands beyond, her large eyes dilated, her little form seemed to expand and elevate itself, her breast heaved, she clasped her thin transparent hands, and uttered a long-drawn exclamation of wonder, reverence, and awe. Mabel and the boys gazed in silent satisfaction at the rapt and excited child, as, lost in the contemplation of this panorama of ocean, earth, and sky, she manifested in her face and gestures an extasy of delight such as words would have been powerless to express.</p>
			<p>With parted lips and straining eyes she continued to gaze, as if every other sense was absorbed in that of sight, and not until some overshadowing buildings shut out the bewildering prospect, did she relapse into her wonted composure. As the carriage paused a moment at the ferry, while awaiting the boat which should transport it to the opposite shore, the child slowly turned her head, met Mabel’s sympathetic glance, drew a long breath, and, with a smile of holy joy, sought the hand of her friend and pressed it with grateful fervor. Still she spoke not a word, as if fearful to break the spell that was upon her, but with patient though trembling expectation, waited until the revelation of beauty and enchantment should again burst upon her sight.</p>
			<p>A moment more and they were launched upon the transparent waters of the bay, where, with nothing to interrupt the vision or disturb the harmony of the scene, the eye might rove at will in all directions, and sweep to the very verge of the distant horizon. With her head bent forward, the light breeze stirring the hair on her blue-veined temples, and her cheek tinged with the faint flush which pleasure and excitement had called up, the invalid girl seemed borne into a new creation and animated by a new life. As if some earth-born mortal had strayed beyond its native sphere, and stood with bounding pulse on the threshold of a higher existence, so this suffering child, emerging from the darkness, seclusion, and obscurity in which her life had hitherto been shrouded, seemed to rejoice, expand, and glow, as if in the presence of Deity.</p>
			<p>Nor were her emotions unshared by her companions. Mabel’s heart beat high with unselfish joy, as she beheld the light which sparkled in Rose’s eye, and the rapture which shone in her beaming features; while Alick forgot his wonted interest in the shipping of the harbor, to follow her earnest gaze as it peered now into the azure depths of sky, then watched the motion of the rolling waves, and finally rested with serene repose on the luxurious verdure of the shore. Even Murray now and then threw himself on the carriage floor at her feet, looked up, and reading her pleasure in her face, exclaimed, “Rosy likes it, don’t you Rosy?” to which Rose responded with a smile so expressive that the little questioner comprehended its meaning and was satisfied.</p>
			<p>Nor were these the only friends destined to sympathize in her enjoyment this day. Scarcely had they gained the streets of New York’s sister city, when a familiar rumble greeted Rose’s ear, and coming towards them from the opposite direction, she saw the well-known cart horses which she had that morning hailed as they came through the arch-way. Never had the brazen knobs of the harness glittered as now in the afternoon sunlight, never had the cart seemed of so deep a blue, never had the young teamster’s face worn so astonished an expression, so joyous and cheering a glow, as that with which he now saw and recognized his little invalid neighbor. With one glance of his quick eye, he took in the whole establishment, the spirited horses, their showy accoutrements, the beautiful carriage, its pleasure-bound occupants, and Rose preëminent in their midst. It was too much for his equanimity. As he passed, he laughed, cracked his long whip, took off his hat, swung it round his head three times, and then gracefully kissed his hand to her in tokon of congratulation.</p>
			<p>This gay and exultant salutation exerted a corresponding effect upon the spirits of the little party. The boys became quite excited in view of it; and Rose, to whose satisfaction this little incident had imparted additional zest, leaned out of the carriage and waved her hand in triumphal glee.</p>
			<p>“He knows you! he is looking back after you! he is glad you are taking a ride!” cried the voices of Alick and Murray, while Mabel herself could not resist turning round for another glimpse of the honest face, which evinced such an evident participation in Rose’s joy.</p>
			<p>Truly this was a great day for Rose,⁠—the one gala day of her life. Not only nature, but the heart of man, seemed to rejoice and sympathize in the occasion. Even Donald, that proud, handsome Donald, who presided on the box, manifested a certain tenderness for her infirmities, drove gently over the pavement, and avoided every rough spot in the road, as if to spare her any unnecessary jolting or fatigue.</p>
			<p>And now they gradually left the city behind them, and struck out into the open country. Green fields and smiling gardens met them at every turn; sweeping elms overarched the roads and refreshed them with their shade; birds flitted among the branches, and flowering shrubs rejoiced the senses with their perfume. Here and there, at intervals, might be seen the neat Dutch farm-houses, each of which seemed in turn, to Rose, the counterpart of her mother’s early home, while, occasionally, as they gained some slight elevation, there burst upon them in one comprehensive view the wide range of rolling meadows, green orchards, and sunny slopes, which mark the scenery of Long Island; while in the distance, the eye might discern, at intervals, the blue waters of the sea.</p>
			<p>At sight of the rural homesteads, the cattle peacefully grazing, or reposing in the shade, and innumerable other objects with which frequent descriptions had rendered Rose partially familiar, her enthusiastic and artless delight would find vent in words; and Mabel’s heart was deeply touched as the child recounted, in simple phrase, the oft-repeated tale of her mother’s happy life at the old farm, the revisiting of which blessed spot had ever constituted the day-dream of her city-bred children.</p>
			<p>“You must go there, Rose!” exclaimed Mabel, eagerly, as she observed the child’s intense and ill-concealed longing; “you must go there with your mother one of these days, and see the good old place.”</p>
			<p>Rose only replied, however, by shaking her head with an air of sad and pensive resignation and Mabel forbore to urge the point, for they had now gained the height of a hill up which the horses had long been toiling, and were greeted by one of those lovely and extensive views, the sight of which effectually sealed Rose’s lips, while a hush of holy awe crept over the little face, the working of which, nevertheless, revealed unutterable things. Who shall tell how much she discerned which is shut from the eye of sense, how much she heard which is whispered only to the ear of the spirit?</p>
			<p>The happiness of Alick and Murray was only secondary on this occasion to that of Rose. Like her, they were privileged beyond their wont, and evinced their satisfaction, the one in the eagerness of his observations and questions, and the other in the laughter, shouts, and unchecked glee of childhood. Now and then, at some shady point in the road, or some pleasant opening in the prospect, the horses were drawn up for a few moments, and the boys were suffered to alight, to challenge each other to a run, or to pluck the wild flowers by the roadside, with which they playfully showered their indulgent aunt and her happy little companion.</p>
			<p>Occasionally Mabel’s thoughts would wander to the gay scene at Riverside; a slight pang of envy would pierce her heart as she mused upon the happy throng assembled there, and she would anxiously ask herself, “Am I missed amid the crowd?” But a look at Rose’s enraptured face, or the shouts of the joyous boys, were sufficient to chase away every obtruding regret, and satisfy her with the reflection, “They surely could not spare me here.”</p>
			<p>But time is a tyrant, and though Mabel had left her watch at home, the slowly descending sun began to give notice of the day’s decline. In spite of innumerable pauses and delays, they had more than half completed the circuit appointed for their afternoon’s excursion, and were already homeward bound. Alick and Murray were somewhat weary with unusual exercise, and a quiet, placid sense of enjoyment had crept over the little party to the exclusion of conversation and merriment. The road, following the undulations of the bay, now and then swept close to the shore, on whose pebbly margin the light waves broke with a soft and pleasant murmur, and all nature wore that air of repose which marks the close of a summer’s day. Reclining on her cushions, with her head gently resting on Mabel’s shoulder, Rose lay watching the light, airy clouds, which, gradually forming into masses of greater volume and richer coloring, hung suspended above the western horizon. So soft and soothing was the scene, so still and motionless the figure of the child, who was revolving in new wonder the miracle of creation, that Mabel believed and hoped she had fallen asleep, and forbore to disturb her by a word. As a sudden turn in the road, however, brought them in full view of the city, Rose raised her head, and, like one abruptly awakened from a pleasant dream, gazed long and fixedly at the huge assemblage of buildings, amid which her young life had hitherto been imprisoned.</p>
			<p>Mabel divined her thoughts. “New York is but a poor place compared with the country, is it, Rosy?” asked she.</p>
			<p>Rose smiled and shook her head.</p>
			<p>“I have thought of a fine plan for you,” continued Mabel, “and one that I am sure you will like. You and your mother, Rose, must go up to the old farm and stay until you get strong and well. There you can see plenty of woods, and fields, and wild flowers, and watch the sun set every night. It is not a long journey,” added she, with animation, her interest in the scheme increasing as she observed the ray of pleasure and hope which had overspread Rose’s face at the suggestion, “it will only take one day. I will see that it is no expense to you, and Jack will stay at home and take care of the house and shop. We will talk it over with your mother this very evening.”</p>
			<p>The glow of delight which had been called up in Rose’s countenance, as Mabel first named this welcome proposal, gave place to an expression of pain and anxiety as she pronounced the concluding phrases of the plan. Tears started into her eyes, and she made haste to lay her hand on Mabel’s arm, and check the glowing anticipations she was indulging of her little friend’s happiness and possible restoration to health, in the broken words, “Dear Miss Mabel! you are very good, but don’t mention it to mother,⁠—please don’t; I can’t go,⁠—indeed I can’t!”</p>
			<p>“But why not, Rose? you feel strong enough for the journey? you will go if your mother consents?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,⁠—no,⁠—please don’t ask her,⁠—indeed I had far rather stay in New York.”</p>
			<p>Mabel looked puzzled and disappointed; she could not understand the child’s eagerness to deny herself so great a pleasure.</p>
			<p>“Miss Mabel,” added Rose, after a little hesitation, seeing that Mabel still awaited an explanation, “you wouldn’t think anybody needed me here, a poor sick girl that has been a care and a trouble all my life, but I could not be happy to go away and leave my dear Jack. Miss Mabel, he is a rough boy, perhaps, but he is never rough to me. Lyddy says he has learned wicked words, but he uses good words to me; they tell me he loves bad company, but I know that he loves his little Rose. He has sat up all night to bathe my aching head,⁠—he has carried me in his arms all day. He would miss me from my little room; the bad boys would whistle round the corner, and there would be no little voice to say, ‘Oh, Jack! stay with Rosy!’ ”</p>
			<p>Innocent, artless Rose! Little did she think that every word of her simple apology pierced like an arrow to the heart of Mabel; little did she comprehend the sudden sting of conscience which caused the quick blush to flood the face, the eyes to droop, and the hand to be nervously withdrawn from her fond and affectionate clasp. She thought she had offended her friend, and continued in urgent tones, “indeed⁠—indeed, I am very thankful, and you are too good; I do not deserve it; but you are not vexed with me?” And laying her hand on Mabel’s arm, and fixing her large eyes full and searchingly upon her, she added, in a touching, pleading tone, “O, dear Miss Mabel, have you a brother, and do you love him as I love Jack?”</p>
			<p>The look, the question seemed empowered with authority to probe Mabel’s very heart. Shrinking from their scrutiny, she sought to evade the one and respond to the other by hiding her face in the folds of Rosy’s shawl, as she drew her to her in a close embrace; and Rose believed herself understood and was satisfied.</p>
			<p>And now they have bid farewell to the blue waters of the bay, the verdant islands, the sky still glowing with the lingering rays of crimson light, and once more are dashing through the city thoroughfares, crowded with vehicles and ringing with bewildering sounds. Many an eye follows them with loving and grateful interest, as they sweep down the narrow street, where, at her humble door, the widow Hope watches for the return of her child. All the neighborhood has missed her, has learned her whereabouts, and is sympathizing in her joy. The mother greets her with an eager smile; the old woman over the way hobbles to the door, doubting her very eyes, and adjusting her spectacles to be sure that she sees aright. The little deaf and dumb boy stands braced against the side of the house, transfixed in mute astonishment; and, as the restive horses, panting for their stable, require the restraining hand of Donald, the brisk, young teamster makes his appearance from beneath the archway, hastens to the carriage, lifts Rose gently in his arms, bears her into the house, and places her in her arm-chair. She looks up, smiles at Mabel and the boys, receives answering smiles in return, and the carriage whirls rapidly away.</p>
			<p>Many a noble steed has that day returned to the city heated, dusty, and jaded. But how many of their gay and fashionable owners have been engaged in a like labor of love? Certain it is, that in after years, and amid other scenes, memory could recall no festive occasion in the annals of the New York belle so blessed in its simple pleasures, so hallowed in its lasting results, as that which constituted to little Rose Hope the one bright spot on this side Heaven.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
