<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Humble love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not proud science, keeps the door of Heaven;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love finds admission where proud science fails.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Young.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>During the fortnight that Dudley continued absent from the city, which was also the limit of his estrangement from Mabel, the only companionship from which she obtained any relief was that of her sister’s children. Her efforts to win the affections of the boys had not been without success; and each in his way gave evidence of a strength of attachment to their young aunt, which she, in her turn, reciprocated with all the warmth of a loving heart. The shout of joy with which Murray hailed her presence, was only equalled by the glow of unspoken pleasure which overspread the face of Alick, and their mutual admiration of their aunt Mabel was the one point on which they never disagreed. Murray’s restlessness subsided into happy, childish enjoyment, when he was permitted to climb her knee at the twilight hour, and prattle to her of the events of the day; and nothing made him so supremely happy, as to fall asleep at night with his hand locked fast in hers. Often, while he was visiting at his grandfather’s, had Mabel loitered from the fashionable dinner party to listen to the little nothings which he was so eager to impart; and more than once her rich evening dress had swept the carpet while she knelt beside his couch and soothed his infant slumbers. Both nature and habit had made Alick independent of caresses; but the gratified look with which he glanced up from his book the first time she questioned him upon the subject of his reading, had taught her the way to his heart, and the boy never again had reason to complain that no one was interested in his pleasure and improvement.</p>
			<p>She had her reward. Childish love is a refreshing balm to the soul; and nothing so quieted her restless spirit as to feel around her the pressure of Murray’s little arms, and observe the sturdy manliness with which Alick, on all occasions, appointed himself her attendant and champion.</p>
			<p>She had nothing to dread, moreover, in her intercourse with the children. They would neither suspect her uneasiness, nor seek to pry into its source, and experiencing a sense of security in their presence, Mabel availed herself of their society on every possible occasion.</p>
			<p>One Sunday they accompanied her home from church after the morning service, and, the early dinner being concluded, followed her, with their pockets full of nuts, into the little apartment adjoining the drawing-room, which she could never enter now without feelings of inexpressible sadness. The boys seated themselves in the window and commenced eating their nuts, while Mabel wandered listlessly about the room, reading, in its abundant decorations, the evidences of Harry’s affection, and wondering where he might be spending the Sabbath, for she had not seen him since morning.</p>
			<p>She paused in front of her richly inlaid writing-desk, and, lifting the lid, took up a little heap of letters recently received from her former teacher and schoolmates. They were in reply to some she had written a few weeks ago in all the extravagance of youthful spirits, and their tone grated strangely on her present feelings. The dear girls congratulated and envied her, and her beloved friend, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, believing her to be happy, wrote only a brief message of affection, sympathizing in the pleasures of her lot, and gently cautioning her not to be too confident of their continuance. Alas! the caution came too late.</p>
			<p>She closed the desk, and taking a book threw herself upon the sofa and tried to read; but her mind wandered from the page, and, after indulging a long fit of gloomy meditation, she rose and walked to the window, where the children were watching the numerous passers by. The day, though cold, was clear and bright, and the family groups that moved through the street formed a pleasant picture.</p>
			<p>“Should you like to take a walk?” asked she, moved by a sudden impulse to run away from her thoughts.</p>
			<p>The proposition was hailed with acclamations of delight. The boys ran for their coats and hats, while Mabel prepared for the excursion with an air of indifference strangely at variance with her once elastic movements. They had proceeded some distance down one of the avenues, without any special destination in view, when Alick suddenly exclaimed, “O Aunt Mabel, why can’t we go and see Rosy?”</p>
			<p>“We can,” said Mabel, “if it will not be too long a walk for Murray.”</p>
			<p>Murray protested against the possibility of his being fatigued, and they at once took the direction toward <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope’s humble dwelling. The quarter in which she lived was poor, but respectable and orderly, and they reached the house without adventure, though not without attracting the attention of the neighborhood, who seldom had an opportunity to witness the dress and bearing of the wealthier classes. They found the windows of the little shop closed, with wooden shutters; and the door, too, was fastened; so that Mabel’s repeated knocks were unanswered. Disappointed at having come so far to no purpose, and fearful that some misfortune had befallen the family, she looked about her to find, if possible, some other mode of entrance⁠—and, at length, proceeding to the end of the building, discovered a low, dark alley, which appeared to lead to the rear of the dilapidated tenement.</p>
			<p>She felt some hesitation in entering this unexplored passageway, but it was no part of her character to be turned from a worthy purpose by the indulgence of idle fears, and bidding the children follow her closely, she penetrated to the extremity of the alley, and found herself in a narrow yard, enclosed by mouldy walls of brick, encumbered with rubbish, but extending, as she had conjectured, across the rear of the entire building. Several doors opened upon this common court-yard, and she was at a loss to distinguish that of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, when the widow herself emerged from one of them with a pail in her hand, and was proceeding in the direction of the pump that stood against the wall; but seeing and recognizing Mabel, she gave a quick start of surprise, and, setting down her pail, came to meet her, with an air of mingled pleasure and embarrassment.</p>
			<p>The latter feeling partially subsided, as Mabel made haste to apologize for her seemingly clandestine entrance, and inquired with cordial interest concerning <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope’s welfare, and that of Rose.</p>
			<p>“Rose is pretty well, just now, for her,” said the widow. “She’ll be right glad to see you, Miss Vaughan. She’s got her little Sunday-school in the back room this afternoon, and I suppose it was their singing that drowned your knock; they’ve got considerable voice, little tots as they are. They are most through now; walk in, Miss Vaughan, it’s a sort of a pretty sight. You wont disturb them,” added she, observing that Mabel hesitated⁠—and, stepping within the woodshed at the rear of her own contracted tenement, she threw open the door of the kitchen, and motioned to Mabel to advance as far as the threshold.</p>
			<p>She did so without attracting observation, and, holding up her finger, she enforced silence upon the boys, who also pressed forward and peeped in.</p>
			<p>Rose was seated in her little arm-chair in the centre of the room, and around her were grouped some half dozen children, none of whom could have been more than seven or eight years of age. Their eyes were fixed upon Rose’s face, while she repeated, slowly and distinctly, the last verse of the hymn they were singing. It ran thus:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Bright in that happy land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beams every eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fed by the Father’s hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love cannot die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! we shall happy be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, from sin and sorrow free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord, we shall reign with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blest, blest, for aye.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>As Rose spoke the last word, the children commenced singing. It was sweet and touching to hear their childish voices uniting in the simple melody which Rose had taught them. But it was sweeter and more touching still to see them, when the hymn was finished, assume a kneeling posture, and repeat after her the words of the little closing prayer with which they were accustomed to separate.</p>
			<p>The tears started to Mabel’s eyes, and with instinctive deference to the solemnity of the service, she retreated at its conclusion, and, drawing Alick and Murray back into the outer shed, closed the door noiselessly, that the little company might not be conscious of intrusion.</p>
			<p>“They’re mostly German children,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope to Mabel, in explanation; “this is a German neighborhood, rather; they can’t get much education in the schools for want of knowing the language. Rosy first taught them English, and then how to read and say their prayers; singing comes natural to ’em. That makes fifteen she’s taught, and some of ’em are bigger than she is, poor child. It aint much,” added the mother with a meditative air, “but then it’s better than nothing, to be sure; and it makes Rose happy.”</p>
			<p>“Better than nothing!” exclaimed Mabel earnestly, “yes, indeed, it is everything.”</p>
			<p>And Mabel felt what she said. In that moment of excited feelings, the wealth, the learning, and the pride of this world sank into nothingness, in comparison with the pure and childlike faith which takes hold on eternal life.</p>
			<p>Alick and Murray were no less impressed than Mabel, as was evident from their awe-struck silence and inquiring faces; there was no opportunity, however, for any further expression of interest, for a confused murmur within the room was followed by the sudden exit of the little band of children, who, after casting curious and lingering glances at Mabel and her nephews, dispersed in different directions⁠—while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope ushered the freshly arrived visitors into her neat though humble kitchen.</p>
			<p>Rose, somewhat exhausted with her labors, had thrown herself back in her chair, but she revived at sight of Mabel, and exclaimed with fervor, “O dear Miss Mabel, how glad I am to see you!”</p>
			<p>It was with something like reverence that Mabel seated herself beside Rose on a low stool, from which one of the children had just risen, and taking her little shrunken hand, pressed it with affectionate fervor.</p>
			<p>“I am glad to see you looking so well, Rose,” said she, gazing into the child’s face with a warm expression of interest. “She really has a color in her cheeks,” observed she to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, who stood watching Rose’s countenance with mingled pleasure and anxiety.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied the widow, with some hesitation, “I’m afraid it ain’t quite natural, though; she’s apt to be feverish about this time of day.”</p>
			<p>“You are tired, Rose, with teaching your little class,” said Mabel. “It is too much for your strength, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” exclaimed Rose, eagerly. “It is very easy teaching them⁠—I love to.” And then, as if anxious to turn the conversation from herself, she addressed numerous inquiries to Alick and Murray, both of whom had pressed close to her side, asking them concerning Lydia, their mamma, and the mode in which they had come thither. Now and then she turned her smiling countenance upon Mabel, with deep and admiring affection, her glance in some degree expressing the two-fold happiness which she experienced in the presence of one in whom her own loving nature recognized a kindred spirit, while the appreciation of the beautiful, which was inherent in the little invalid, found in this new friend the perfect and only illustration of its ideal.</p>
			<p>It was with mingled emotions that Mabel perceived the influence she exercised. As she met the admiring glance of Rose, a glow of self-satisfaction overspread her face, such as all the flatteries of the ball-room could not call up. But this sentiment of gratified vanity was chastened and subdued by an unwonted sense of unworthiness, which forced itself upon her as she compared her own aimless life with the self-devotion of the invalid child.</p>
			<p>This latter sentiment asserted itself still more strongly before the conclusion of the visit.</p>
			<p>The little company were met together on more free and familiar terms than on the occasion of their first becoming acquainted. Mabel’s easy cordiality disarmed all embarrassment and reserve, and even the awkward constraint of the widow Hope was not proof against the considerate kindness of her manner. Thus the conversation became brisk and general, the contrast in social position was well-nigh forgotten, and the previous good understanding of the parties was ripening into the confidence of friendship.</p>
			<p>Something of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope’s family history was elicited, some reminiscences of her better days were called up, and her hopes and fears for the future welfare of herself and family, touched upon. Rose’s week-day employments, and her Sabbath labors and pleasures, were enumerated and discussed, and Jack was for the first time brought to Mabel’s knowledge, through the frequent mention which was made of him.</p>
			<p>Into all this Mabel entered with ready interest, while a corresponding sympathy was expressed in return, in the countenances of both Rose and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, when allusion was incidentally made to the circumstance of her having been motherless from her childhood.</p>
			<p>Alick, meanwhile, was content to listen to the conversation, but Murray, not satisfied with playing the part of a silent spectator, began to look about him for amusement; and, espying on the table an exceedingly ragged and shabby-looking book, he tossed it on the floor, and commenced kicking it contemptuously from one end of the kitchen to the other. Observing Rose’s eye wander towards him, Mabel turned, saw the nature of his occupation, and starting forward, checked his play and rescued the volume, at the same time saying, good-naturedly,</p>
			<p>“Murray, don’t kick the poor old book. I’m afraid you have no respect for age, my dear.”</p>
			<p>Rose smiled. “It has done good service,” said she. “Perhaps I like it better for that.”</p>
			<p>Mabel opened it; it was an ancient copy of “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pilgrim’s Progress</span>.” As she turned over the leaves she directed Alick’s attention to the fact, that it was a copy of the same work she had bought for him, at his own request, a few weeks before, when he chanced to be with her in a bookstore and took a fancy to the richly-bound and beautifully illustrated book.</p>
			<p>“Mine ain’t like that,” said he, with rude disdain; “Mine is handsome⁠—that is a real ugly old thing.”</p>
			<p>As he finished speaking, his quick eye detected the mortification which Rose’s face evinced at his unflattering comparison; and, regretting his thoughtlessness, he at once endeavored to atone for it, by exclaiming⁠—</p>
			<p>“Rose ought to have one like mine, aunt Mabel.”</p>
			<p>“She shall have one,” said Mabel, unhesitatingly. “I will bring you one like Alick’s, with pleasure, Rose, if you would like it.”</p>
			<p>Rose smiled pensively, but with evident satisfaction.</p>
			<p>Alick’s face glowed with delight as, without giving Rose time to reply, he proceeded to expatiate to her upon the rich binding, gilt-edged leaves, and illuminated margins of the volume she was to possess.</p>
			<p>“Shan’t you like it, Rose?” said he, when he had finished the description.</p>
			<p>“Will it cost much?” asked Rose, thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes!” said Alick, confidently.</p>
			<p>“As much,” said Rose, looking at Mabel, and at the same time taking up a well-worn testament which lay beside her, and a few stray leaves from a primer,⁠—“As much as two new ones like these would cost?”</p>
			<p>“As much as half a dozen like each of those,” replied Mabel, a little astonished at the question.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” exclaimed Rose, with deep-drawn breath, “I should rather have <em>them</em>.” Then, the excitement of her tone subsiding, she added, with slight hesitation, “But perhaps I ought not to be the one to choose.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you ought,” replied Mabel, while Alick looked greatly disappointed. “You shall have whichever you please, or both.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, both!” said Alick, with a relieved and brightened expression of countenance.</p>
			<p>“No, not both,” said Rose, with unmistakable decision. Her practical mind, trained in the school of necessity, had seen no impropriety in suggesting the change, but her deeply sensitive nature recoiled from voluntarily placing herself under a double obligation.</p>
			<p>“You shall have your own way, Rose,” said Mabel, who had been watching her face with intense interest.</p>
			<p>“Then I should like the testament and primers, best,” said Rose. “These are all we have had to read and study in, Sunday afternoons, and they are almost worn out. The little children can’t read mother’s bible, because the long ff’s puzzle them so; how glad they will be to have each a testament of their own⁠—and how good you are, Miss Mabel.”</p>
			<p>“I good!” exclaimed Mabel, with the deepest sense of humility she had ever known, “It is nothing for me to furnish the books, but how much they owe to you, Rosy?” And rising from her low seat and drawing her fur mantle around her, as if about to depart, she stooped down and imprinted a kiss upon Rose’s forehead, the action at the same time serving to hide the emotion which had been excited by the child’s unhesitating generosity.</p>
			<p>“Is there nothing else I can bring you?” asked she. “Can not you think of something that you could relish⁠—something that would relieve you when you felt feverish at night?”</p>
			<p>“Oranges!” shouted Murray, from a corner of the room, where he had seated himself astride of one of the low stools. Murray had but one pleasant association with fevers and sick rooms, and that was oranges. Every body smiled, and Mabel availed herself of the suggestion.</p>
			<p>“I will bring her some oranges, certainly,” said she, glancing at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, “if you think they would be wholesome for her.</p>
			<p>“I dare say they might be refreshing,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope; “she usually has a pretty hot spell towards morning. I tell her it would not be so if she’d go to bed early, and not have any excitement evenings; but she sits up, playing jack-straws and so on, and sometimes after she’s in bed Jack props her up with one thing and another, and there she stays working out puzzles, and models, and I don’t know what they call ’em, until her poor back aches and she can’t go to sleep.”</p>
			<p>Rose looked uneasily at her mother as she entered this complaint, and Mabel glanced inquiringly at Rose, surprised at a charge which seemed to intimate a want of prudence and docility in the youthful invalid.</p>
			<p>“You should not do that, Rose,” said she, as with both her soft hands she smoothed the light hair from the child’s transparent temples. “Do you like games and puzzles so much?”</p>
			<p>“Jack does,” said Rose, in a soft, meaning whisper, meant only for Mabel’s ear.</p>
			<p>The words penetrated to the heart of the listener. There was a depth of sisterly love, and a power of self-sacrifice expressed in that simple utterance, which were irresistibly touching in one whose feebleness might seem to excuse her from all responsibility.</p>
			<p>Mabel felt the full force of the example, which was to her, at once, a lesson and a reproach. For a moment she stood gazing at Rose, as if striving to read in her face the secret of that divine strength which was victorious over the infirmities of the flesh; then, at a loss for words, and afraid perhaps of betraying how deeply she was moved, she made haste to bid her farewell; and the boys having also taken leave of the little invalid, they all followed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope into the shop, from whence, having unbarred the front door, she ushered them into the street. Before taking her leave, Mabel begged that she might be kept informed through Lydia of Rose’s state of health, and be applied to without reserve if there was any way in which she could minister to her comfort.</p>
			<p>The day was fast drawing to a close, and after accompanying her little nephews to the hotel, Mabel proceeded with haste towards her own home.</p>
			<p>What a change had two short hours effected in her air, her countenance, and her thoughts! She had gone forth excited, restless, and unhappy, and thus, also, she returned; but how chastened, subdued, and changed, were all these emotions! Then, she was excited by vehement regrets, restless with vain longings, and unhappy from disappointed hopes. Now, her spirit was disturbed, but it was by a new revelation of things hitherto unseen; she was eager and uneasy, but it was with a vague longing to rise above her former self; she was dissatisfied, but it was the discontent whose fruit is repentance unto life eternal.</p>
			<p>How soft, how gentle was the voice which had thus unconsciously roused a sleeping conscience! It was no startling warning, no stern alarum, which had awed and bewildered the trembling soul. It was but the soft breathing of a loving heart, giving utterance to the gentlest tones; but a still small voice within responded to the whisper, and thenceforth could not be silenced. She might resist it,⁠—she did resist it,⁠—for earthly temptations are strong, and heavenly impulses brief and evanescent. But it came again, an unwelcome intruder on her gayer hours, a patient supplicant pleading with her in her solitude. Like an angel sitting at the gate, warding off all hostile influences and ever waiting to be heard, it silently, secretly gathered strength for the hour when the heart should be aroused by its trumpet-call, when the conflict should be ended, and the victory won.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
