<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 26</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Something was there, that, through the lingering night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Outwatches patiently the taper’s light;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Something that faints not through the day’s distress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That fears not toil, that knows not weariness.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hemans.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway was very indignant the next morning, when, in reply to her pointed questions, Mabel assured her that she had not been introduced to the distinguished guest of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood, whom she supposed, however, to be a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bayard, such an individual having been present. So much was the ambitious aunt piqued at this neglect, that she effectually restrained her curiosity, and forbore making any inquiries of her neighbors concerning the stranger, lest she should be compelled to acknowledge that her niece had not made his acquaintance; and thus, much to Mabel’s relief, he was not again referred to in her presence.</p>
			<p>But the vexation which this circumstance occasioned to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway was slight in comparison with the resentment she felt against her nephew, when, in the course of the day, she heard from Hannah, her cook,⁠—who had it from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Paradox’s parlor girl, who had it from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bloodgood’s man, Patrick,⁠—that “the young New York chap, who was a stayin’ at the widder Ridgway’s, had been pretty considerable sprung,” the previous night, and “must have got back to town by a miracle, with his dragon of a baste.”</p>
			<p>So long as Harry maintained the position of a gentleman, and was courted throughout the vicinity as a foreign-bred youth, of wealth, accomplishments, and spirit, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway, prudent as she was in her own affairs, cared not how thoughtlessly he idled away his time, or how recklessly he squandered his father’s money. The moment, however, that he overstepped the outermost limits of that decorum which society enjoins, her worldly-wise sagacity took alarm; and now that she heard his name lightly used even by servants, she began to apprehend that instead of an honor, he would prove a cause of discredit and disgrace to her house. She was not one to be restrained by motives of delicacy from expressing, in Mabel’s hearing, her contempt and disgust at what she termed this scandalous exposure, nor did she hesitate to acquaint Harry, by the broadest hints and inuendoes, with her knowledge of the shameful events of the evening, which she declared to be common talk, and against which she inveighed as reflecting not only upon the delinquent, but upon all who had the misfortune to be connected with him.</p>
			<p>Whatever indifference Harry might feel or feign at these home thrusts and sarcasms with which he was constantly assailed, they were the cause of the most poignant suffering to Mabel, and the more so as she plainly saw that although apparently listened to by Harry in dogged unconcern, they coöperated with other circumstances in angering and driving him to desperation.</p>
			<p>Conscious that he had disgraced himself in the estimation of the respectable portion of the community, feeling it little less than an insult to the venerable Judge Paradox to present himself in the office, where he was but a nominal student, and driven from his aunt’s house by her worse than useless invectives, he now gave himself wholly up to a life of excitement, and sought only those associates among whom he was sure to find a ready welcome. Thus, he was sometimes absent for days together; the time of his return was always uncertain, and although his departure was invariably the signal for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway to denounce his idle and reckless habits, the ungracious reception which she gave him after every absence, was little calculated to render his excursions from home less frequent or protracted.</p>
			<p>The rooms which he had expected to occupy were in a new building, not yet completed. The work might, perhaps, have been hastened, but neither he nor his aunt cared to press the point, for it was now generally conceded that Harry’s residence in L⁠⸺ was not destined to be permanent. Nothing, however, had been heard from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan with reference to the probable time of his return, and, although the presence of his children in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway’s house was fast becoming burdensome, there seemed no other alternative than for them to remain there for the present.</p>
			<p>“Do go to bed, child! Dear me, you’ll make yourself sick!” Aunt Sabiah would anxiously exclaim, when creeping cautiously into Mabel’s room at the midnight hour, she would find the faithful sister watching at the window for her brother’s return.</p>
			<p>But Mabel would gently shake her head in reply to her aunt’s expostulations, and say, “O no, aunt; I am not tired. I could not sleep.”</p>
			<p>“There isn’t one chance in ten that he’ll come home to-night,” Sabiah would, perhaps, rejoin. “You’re getting pale and miserable, and what’s the use, after all?”</p>
			<p>“I feel anxious,” was sure to be the answer. “He’ll come soon, I think,” and with a few persuasive words, Sabiah would be coaxed back to bed, and Mabel would persist in her lonely vigils.</p>
			<p>It was a principle with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway that her doors should be locked at ten o’clock precisely,⁠—a rule which had been occasionally infringed during the few weeks succeeding the arrival of her young visitors, but which had been rigidly enforced from the time of her becoming acquainted with Harry’s irregularities. Thus, it was only by the most unwearied watchfulness that Mabel could ensure her brother’s ready admittance; and who shall tell how often the wanderer was beguiled back by the certainty that, come at what hour he might, whether of the night or day, the same gentle voice which had lamented his departure, would greet him at his return, and the same sweet face which had anxiously watched him as he went, would welcome him with a smile, mournful, perhaps, but always kind?</p>
			<p>All the fatigues and dissipations of the previous winter had not so weighed upon Mabel’s frame and exhausted her strength, as did these prolonged and midnight vigils, when, with straining eye and ear, she thus waited and hoped and prayed. But though the color was each day fading from her cheek, and her step had lost its elasticity, she gained, in these lonely communings with God and her own heart, a power which is born of endurance, and a strength which comes only through suffering. With the world and its bewildering sounds shut out, and the page of duty open before her, she was patiently learning that great lesson of life which is the key to all the rest; and in humble forgetfulness of self, and serene reliance on Heavenly aid, she was gradually divining that precious secret which had rendered Rosy’s little life a blessed ministry.</p>
			<p>Her willingness both to do and to suffer was soon put to the very test of which she had long had a foreshadowing and presentiment. She was sitting one moonlight night at her accustomed window, which commanded a view of the street, and with her tired head resting on her hand, was listening for the familiar sounds which betokened Harry’s return, when she was startled by a vehicle, which was none of his, approaching her aunt’s door, and the strange, hurried voices, significant motions and words of caution and alarm which succeeded, served at once to confirm the cruel conviction which had already flashed upon her. The scene was precisely such as her imagination had long since conjured up. Mad Sallie had but executed the destructive work which might well have been anticipated from a refractory beast driven by a mad man, and Harry was brought home insensible, perhaps already bereft of life.</p>
			<p>“Don’t be scared; I guess he’ll come to,” said a rough but kindly voice, as Mabel met, at the door, the benevolent farmer and his sturdy sons, when bearing in their heavy burden.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he is dead!” exclaimed she, in a hollow whisper, as she fixed her eyes with a rigid stare upon her brother’s ghastly countenance.</p>
			<p>“No, no, not a bit of it; don’t you believe any such thing,” said the countryman, as having laid the helpless form of the young man on the entry sofa, he took a silk handkerchief from his hat and wiped his heated brow. Then, seeing that Mabel stood like one turned to stone, watching his face as if to read in it her brother’s fate, he went on to state in earnest terms his belief that the young fellow was only stunned; that he had spoken since they lifted him from the ground; that he appeared to have no broken bones; that he had been on a bit of spree and was pretty well corned;⁠—no offence to the young woman⁠—he hoped she wasn’t a near relation of the poor dog whose horse, devil of a beast as it was, seemed to have the most sense of the two; “never you mind,” added he, in a truly fatherly tone, patting with his rough hand the head of Mabel, who now leaned over Harry’s prostrate form, listening to his feeble but regular breathing⁠—“he’s got a lesson that’s better’n preachin’,⁠—p’r’aps ’t’ll be the savin’ on him, soul and body.”</p>
			<p>“Bring him up stairs,” ejaculated Mabel, in a low, imploring voice; her subdued tones proving, even at this exciting moment, the force of that habit of watchful stillness with which, night after night, she had evaded her aunt Ridgway’s hearing.</p>
			<p>The precaution was unnecessary now, however. The house was by this time fully aroused, and poor Harry’s bearers were met on the staircase by its bustling and voluble mistress, who, but for the old farmer’s obstinate resistance, would have compelled them to pause then and there, and acquaint her with every circumstance of the accident, before they were suffered to proceed with their burden. The bustle and confusion which ensued, were such as usually attend similar events in a household, save that in this instance, they were aggravated by the irritation and annoyance which succeeded <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway’s first outburst of astonishment and alarm. Her earliest impulse was, as we have said, to possess herself of every particular; her next, to rid the house of strangers; and her last thought seemed to be of the poor sufferer, over whom Mabel hung, in an agony of suspense, while Sabiah wrung her hands, groaned and anxiously asked herself⁠—“how will sister Margaret put up with this new trouble?” Mabel, though the most afflicted, was the only one of the household who had the presence of mind to send for a physician or attempt to apply restoratives; and her simple efforts, unavailing as they were, served to calm her mind and render her capable of affording that assistance which the medical man required on his arrival. While Sabiah gave up to the despair which had taken possession of her, and while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway examined her parlor carpet to discover whether it had been stepped on by dirty feet, and looked into the kitchen cupboards to make sure that no stragglers had taken advantage of the confusion to conceal themselves there, Mabel held the lamp for the doctor, furnished him with bandages and other necessary articles, replied to all his questions, and received at last the comforting assurance that, except some severe bruises and a slight cut on the back of the head, there was no perceptible injury, and that nothing serious need be apprehended, unless fever supervened.</p>
			<p>“Cannot you do something to restore him to consciousness?” she anxiously asked.</p>
			<p>The doctor shook his head. “I cannot judge,” said he, “how much his present condition is to be attributed to the accident, and how much to previous excitement of the brain. I can tell better to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>Morning, however, brought no change for the better, and before night the fever, which had been the chief cause of apprehension, set in. Now followed days and weeks of continued nursing, anxiety, and suspense, during which Mabel was the constant and unwearied attendant at the bedside of her brother. As the stupor, in which he had lain for some hours, gave place to feverish excitement, he manifested, in no measured terms, his preference for his sister’s presence and care; barely tolerating his aunt Sabiah, and, with fierce imprecations and threats, driving <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway from the room whenever she ventured to set her foot within the door. From Mabel’s hand only would he receive the cooling draught, and to her alone was he gentle and submissive.</p>
			<p>The wild words of delirium would die upon his lips as his eye met her loving glance, and his excited gestures would often give place to quiet and repose when he felt the pressure of her soft hand on his burning temples. Sometimes, as she sat patiently by his side through the long watches of the night, he would reveal to her in measured whispers the confession of his past folly, extravagance, and dissipation; gazing into her face meanwhile with a holy awe, as if he believed her some angel messenger sent thither to gather up the burdensome secrets which lay upon his conscience. A less excited imagination, indeed, might almost have mistaken her for an apparition, as, clothed in a long white wrapper, and becoming each day more pale and worn, she moved noiselessly about the darkened chamber, anticipating the sufferer’s slightest want, and patiently soothing his restlessness.</p>
			<p>Her aunt Margaret, exasperated by the abuse with which Harry assailed her, washed her hands, as she said, of all responsibility in regard to him, and both by her own indignant and unaccommodating spirit, and by the strict orders which she gave her servants, contrived to double Mabel’s cares and anxieties, and impress upon her a most painful sense of the difficulties which sickness made in a household. Poor Sabiah, divided between love for Mabel and dread of her sister’s anger, hovered stealthily in the vicinity of Harry’s room, haunted the staircase and passage-way, and patiently strove to relieve her niece’s weariness; but in her perturbed state of feeling, she effected but little in Mabel’s favor, and brought down on her own head a torrent of reproaches from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway, who, having no other hearer, took every opportunity of expressing to Sabiah a piece of her mind, and declaring that she had no idea of being imposed upon by her relations.</p>
			<p>But, although Mabel’s task was at once solitary and trying, it had its alleviations. It was far better to see Harry lying there in his helplessness, than to picture him amid scenes of folly and vice; and in the gentle ministries of affection her own bruised and wounded spirit found a healing balm, while in the hearts of both, a silent influence was at work which hallowed those lonely hours, and made that quiet chamber the nursery of blessed and immortal fruits.</p>
			<p>It was about three weeks after the accident, and at the dim hour of twilight, when Mabel, believing her brother to have fallen asleep, threw herself on her knees beside him, and remained awhile lost in meditation and prayer. It had been to her a day of no ordinary suspense. The doctor pronounced his patient to be nearly free from fever, declared that the crisis was past, and gave her encouragement that he would soon be well. This assurance had, however, failed to satisfy her. It was true that Harry now slept quietly, breathed with ease, and took submissively the nourishment that was offered him. Still she felt that there was something about him unnatural and strange. Since he ceased his incoherent ravings, he had not been heard to utter a syllable; and although she was conscious that he watched her continually, he made no reply to her gentle inquiries, and, when she approached him, turned away his head, closed his eyes, and remained in one position for hours. Could his intellect have become dimmed? did he cherish bitter thoughts toward her? or what was the cloud which had thus settled upon him?</p>
			<p>Exhausted by harrowing doubts and fears, she had rested a long time with her face shrouded in the bed clothes, and her soul laid bare to the all-seeing Father, when a hand was gently laid upon her head, and a faint, broken voice, murmured, “Mabel.” She looked hastily up, and met the earnest, tearful gaze of Harry, fixed full and eagerly upon her. The tender glance, and penitent tones of the chastened spirit were not to be mistaken; he stretched out both his feeble arms, and, with a cry of joy, she fell upon his bosom, and they wept together. As in the days of their innocent childhood, when nestled on one pillow, they had mourned over their little griefs, and soothed each other’s little sorrows, so now, with cheek pressed to cheek, every shadow of past estrangement was washed away in a soft rain of tears, while many a cherished hope for the future dawned amid that refreshing dew of sympathy. Not a word was spoken, not an explanatory phrase was breathed by either;⁠—nor were they needed. In that moment of the heart’s recognition, that outpouring of mutual confidence and restored affection, Mabel felt herself repaid for every trial, every sacrifice, every suffering. She had watched, and waited, and hoped, and prayed. In spite of weariness, alienation, disgrace, and sin, led by patience, fortitude, and holy love, she had sought and found her brother.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
