<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 38</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>God calls our loved ones, but we lose not wholly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">What He hath given;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They live on earth, in thought and deed, as truly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">As in His Heaven.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">J. G.</abbr> Whittier.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>As soon as Harry could be released from the cares attending the harvesting of his crops, he came again to his father’s, partly to share his sister’s joy in the old gentleman’s restoration to health and peace of mind, and still more to persuade Mabel, if possible, to return home with him. Both he and Helen had, on their former visit, observed her unusual paleness, varied only by a feverish flush which seemed to denote an exhausted state of the system; and they had only awaited <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s complete recovery, to insist upon her coming to them for recreation and change of scene.</p>
			<p>Mabel, who felt no other symptoms of illness than an unusual lassitude and occasional headache, would have resisted Harry’s pleadings; but her father, realizing how severely her strength had recently been taxed, warmly seconded the proposition, and even intimated the probability that, if they found themselves equal to the jaunt, he and Sabiah would join her at the farm, in the course of a few weeks.</p>
			<p>It was pleasant to see the joyousness which mantled Harry’s face at this voluntary suggestion on the part of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan. “Come up early next month,” exclaimed he (it was now October), “and stay with us until after Thanksgiving! All of you, I mean,” added he, glancing at Sabiah, and from her to the boys; “that is a day which allows of no exceptions; and Helen and I shall be rejoiced to make it an occasion for welcoming you all at once.”</p>
			<p>“We have everything to be thankful for, my son,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, surveying the little group collected around him, with a pride far deeper than that of former days; “we will meet together as you propose, and praise God in our hearts for his wonderful goodness to us.”</p>
			<p>It being thus arranged that the rest of the household were to follow in a few weeks, Harry hurried Mabel with her preparations, and the next day she accompanied him to the abode of plenty and contentment, where his happy young wife was impatiently awaiting their arrival.</p>
			<p>“Now remember, Mabel,” said Helen, when the former was at length installed in the room which Harry in building the house had denominated Mabel’s, “you are to do nothing while you are here, but ride, and walk, and talk, and waste time, if you choose to term it so, in every possible way. You have had more than your share of cares and duties for the last five years, and lately have been quite worn out with them; so now you are to consider that no one has the slightest claim upon you. You are to keep your hands folded in this fashion (and she playfully placed them in a most indolent attitude), and are to make it the chief business of your life to be idle.”</p>
			<p>Mabel declared with a languid air, which was more felt than feigned, that she should have no difficulty in obeying these rules, for if the weather continued as at present, she could spend whole days satisfactorily in gazing out of the window.</p>
			<p>This unusual lassitude, and low, feverish tendency, which had been observed in her before she left home, became more marked, now that she was freed from all necessity for exertion; and Harry, no less than Helen, sought to dissipate the effects of too much anxiety and confinement, by insisting that she should spare herself all fatigue, and keep as much as possible in the open air. Thus, every day, upon some pretext or other, her brother persuaded her to accompany him in his drives about the farm, usually leaving her in some shaded spot, while he went to oversee his laborers; when she, partly occupied with a book, and partly engaged in the observation of nature, enjoyed the healthy recreation, and quiet sense of repose, of which she stood greatly in need.</p>
			<p>One morning, when they were returning from one of these excursions, they perceived a neat little pleasure carriage standing before the door, which Harry recognized as belonging to Percival; and, at the same moment, Mabel saw through the window the unmistakable form of his venerable mother who, at the announcement of Mabel’s approach, had risen from her seat, and with a smiling countenance was awaiting the arrival of her young friend.</p>
			<p>The old lady’s figure was firm and erect as ever; her eye had lost nothing of its brightness; and her countenance, though more strongly marked with the lines of age, still wore its mild and winning benignity of expression. Nor had time had power to diminish the tender interest which she cherished for Mabel, as was evident from the heartiness with which she advanced to meet the eager and excited girl, and fold her in a warm embrace, saying, “Ah, my dear child, I see you then at last. I began to think this was a pleasure which was to be forever denied me!”</p>
			<p>Mabel could not find words to express the joy she felt at the unexpected meeting; but Madam Percival who read her countenance aright, and saw that she was well nigh overpowered by the train of moving associations which it called up, responded to her broken ejaculations of surprise and delight, by pressing her once more to her side, saying⁠—“These re-unions are blessed things my dear!⁠—and here is my patient Bessie, too, waiting to claim you as an old friend.”</p>
			<p>Mabel, who had not had a thought for any one but Madam Persival, now followed the direction of the old lady’s eyes, and her face lighted up with fresh satisfaction as she beheld Bayard’s favorite niece and her own devoted champion, scarcely altered in appearance since she had seen her last, and with her enthusiasm for Mabel undiminished, as was evident from the beaming face with which she watched her movements, and now, as she saw herself recognized, came forward with outstretched hand.</p>
			<p>“And do you know my sister? have you made the acquaintance of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan,” asked Mabel, as having exchanged cordial salutations with Bessie, she glanced towards Helen, who was a deeply interested and smiling spectator of the scene.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my dear,” said Madam Percival, “I have been impatient for some time past to make <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan’s acquaintance, and must acknowledge that she was the sole object of our visit to-day; we had no idea of the double pleasure that was in store for us.”</p>
			<p>Numerous questions and responses now succeeded. Madam Percival had earnest inquiries to make concerning every member of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s family, especially the boys, to an account of whose growth and progress she was lending a most attentive ear, while Helen and Bessie were busily chatting together, when the entrance of Harry, who had been detained by one of his neighbors, served to give a more general tone to the conversation.</p>
			<p>Madam Percival still kept Mabel close beside her, however, and at length remarked, with some little anxiety in her tone,⁠—“They tell me, my dear, that you are not well⁠—that you have had too much care of late;⁠—so, though I should not judge it from your face (Mabel’s face was a little flushed by the excitement of the interview), I wish to make it a plea for begging you away from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan for a few days; that is if you will trust yourself to an old friend’s care, as readily as you once did when she was a stranger. Come,” added she, laying her hand earnestly on Mabel’s shoulder, by way of enforcing the request⁠—“will you indulge me so far as to go home with us to-day?⁠—we will restore you on Sunday when we meet your brother at church.”</p>
			<p>Mabel thanked her most warmly, professed unbounded confidence in that kindness and care of which she had formerly experienced the benefit, but at the same time hesitated, and gave a somewhat evasive reply to the invitation, saying that she considered herself under Helen’s orders, and doubted her consent.</p>
			<p>“Oh, please do as grandmamma proposes,” exclaimed Bessie, while Madam Percival turned to Helen to urge her claims; “we shall be so delighted to have you with us! uncle Bayard is absent attending court all the time and we miss him so much!”</p>
			<p>Perhaps Bessie, who still cherished a painful recollection of her uncle’s severe and unjust criticism of Mabel, might have suspected that he was an object of her avoidance and dislike, and so artfully added this last clause by way of assuring her that she would not be subjected to his society; if so, her suspicions were probably confirmed by the fact that when Madam Percival triumphantly announced Helen’s consent to grant the required leave of absence, Mabel no longer manifested any want of alacrity in accepting the invitation, and expressed without reserve the pleasure she should have in accompanying them.</p>
			<p>“But, there is a condition!” exclaimed Harry. “My dear Madam⁠—you will not overlook the proviso in the case. I have already had your horses led to the stable, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan depends upon your company to dinner.”</p>
			<p>“I intended to return immediately,” said Madam Percival, “and left word to that effect at home; but as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan assures me that an early dinner is no inconvenience in her household, and my young friend here may need a little time to prepare for a three days absence, I think, Bessie, we will astonish <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten by playing truant to-day.”</p>
			<p>And the venerable lady, who knew how to accommodate herself with ready grace to all circumstances in life, allowed Mabel to assist in the removal of her bonnet and shawl, and during the space of a couple of hours, which was the limit of her visit, entered with cordial zeal into the interests of the youthful group by whom she was surrounded, and by the charm of her manners and conversation imparted both ease and spirit to the social occasion, without once derogating in the least from the dignity which became her years.</p>
			<p>As dinner was served with great punctuality, and Madam Percival was anxious to reach home before sundown, no further delay was suffered to interfere with her departure, and at an early hour in the afternoon the party set off; Mabel and the old lady on the back seat of the light pleasure carriage, and Bessie stationed in front, beside a serious looking youth who officiated as coachman to the establishment.</p>
			<p>It was one of those lovely days belonging to the somewhat disputed period of the Indian summer, which, whether it occurs earlier or later, is marked by characteristics peculiar to the American Autumn. The atmosphere was suffused with that peculiar haziness which, without obscuring the sun, subdues and mellows its rays, and imparts a singular brilliancy to the rich and variegated foliage. The sky, unspotted by a cloud, was of the clearest and brightest blue, while the outline of the distant horizon was rendered shadowy and indistinct by the light curtain of mist which enveloped all nature; and as the eye at intervals roamed across the boundless waves of the rolling prairie, the great hay ricks discerned through the distance and fog might almost be mistaken for islands in mid ocean or ships with outspread sails. For the last half of the way, the road leading to Lake Farm stretched through Percival’s own land, now winding like a thread amid corn and wheat fields of nearly a mile in extent, where the golden grain was peeping from the husk and inviting the sickle of the husbandman, and now leading the traveller beneath the refreshing shade of grand primeval forests, which an English nobleman might covet. Sometimes the sound of the horses’ feet would startle a squirrel or a rabbit and send it darting across their path; or a partridge would rise with a whirring sound from the tall waving grain; or, as the travellers entered the cool thicket, birds of various note would greet them with a concert of song.</p>
			<p>Nor was this harmony of sight and sound marred by any sense of effort or constraint on the part of Mabel and her companions, who discoursed with unaffected ease, or maintained, at pleasure, that silence which is sometimes so satisfactory among those who are confident of each other’s sympathetic enjoyment. As they drew within half a mile of their destination, the road led through a little grove of maples and oaks, gorgeous with brilliantly-dyed leaves, a portion of which had already fallen and bestrewed the ground; and, for the rest of the distance, Mabel was conscious that they were gradually ascending to a higher point of land. She was not prepared, however, for the scene which awaited her, when at length, emerging from the wood, she saw the house directly before her, and took in at a glance the expansive view which the little eminence commanded. The simple but tasteful structure was built of the pale yellow stone peculiar to the region, forming a soft and beautiful contrast to the heavy verdure of a few old pines and hemlocks which stood in its immediate vicinity. It was long and low, being only a story and a half in height, but covering a wide extent of ground, having wings on either side, and including all the principal rooms on the lower floor; while across the front ran a light verandah, festooned with the graceful American woodbine, now crimson with the tints of autumn. As far as the eye could reach in every direction, save one, it was met by an open expanse of prairie, grain land, and forest, with here and there a little collection of farm-houses and a village church, but fair and extensive as was this view of the rich and open country, the involuntary exclamation of delight which burst from Mabel’s lips, as she looked forth upon the prospect, was chiefly due to the emotion of joyful surprise with which she beheld, stretching far out to the eastern horizon, dancing and sparkling in the sunlight, the clear, blue waters of Lake Michigan.</p>
			<p>“It is beautiful!” said Madam Percival, in response to Mabel’s half-expressed ecstasy of pleasure; while Bessie turned her back upon the prospect to read its reflection in Mabel’s eyes. “Familiar as I am with the scene,” continued the old lady, “I never drive up this slope without a fresh sense of the greatness and beauty of that vast inland-ocean, in which the giant nature of the West mirrors its face; and I am always ready to congratulate my son anew on the patience with which he occupied a most primitive dwelling, until he had acquired the means to build a house to his own taste, and on the spot of his choice. It looks uncommonly pleasant this afternoon. Home is home, after a twenty miles trip, especially when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten stands at the door to give one welcome.”</p>
			<p>The faithful serving-woman was already on the verandah to meet her mistress, whose unusual excursion and lengthened absence had occasioned her some anxiety. “You will not think I have been gone too long, Patten,” said Madam Percival, “when you see whom I have brought back with me;” and, as Mabel leaned forward, bowed, and was recognized, the good woman confirmed her mistress’ remark, by holding up both hands and exclaiming, “Bless my eyes! it’s Miss Vaughan, for all the world; and the nicest young lady that ever I see,⁠—asking your pardon, Miss Bessie,” she added in a low voice, “for you never was so tried, and there’s no knowing what folks is till they’re tried. And, how’s them children, Miss?” she continued, when Mabel had alighted, and cordially shaken her by the hand. “Almost men now, I dare say?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, almost, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten; and I was afraid I had got beyond your knowledge too.”</p>
			<p>“You? dear me, no,⁠—you look just as much like a pictur as ever, only a little pale like; but I dare say you’re tired, and my mistress too, so do walk in⁠—walk in and get rested.” And the good soul led the way to the sitting-room, where a fire was already kindled, in anticipation of a cool evening. And for one half hour she was unwearied in her efforts to render them all, as she said, “right comfortable.”</p>
			<p>And right comfortable it seemed to Mabel, as the twilight hours came on and found them grouped round the wide hearth; Madam Percival, as she sat upright in her easy-chair, relating to the girls on either side of her those most delightful of all narratives, the experiences of bygone days; while the flickering flames cast a subdued, but cheerful light round the room, and were reflected in the polished furniture and the old family tea-urn under the antiquated sideboard.</p>
			<p>The rough, new, and undeveloped character of almost every thing pertaining to Western life furnishing a wide field for the energy and activity both of body and mind, may nerve and strengthen the powers for the performance of many a trying task; but to one wearied from the overtasking of these powers, and yearning for the rest which even the youthful spirit occasionally craves, there is something unspeakably refreshing in such ancient, and time-honored tokens as everywhere pervaded the establishment over which Madam Percival presided with that venerable dignity characteristic of the past. To Mabel especially, who had been taxed with a responsibility disproportioned to her years, and had well nigh sunk beneath the burden of recent labors, there was sweet and welcome repose in being thus sheltered under the wing of her aged friend’s tender and protecting care; and even the heavily-carved chairs and tables, the Turkey carpet, the antique fire-set, and the quaint, old family plate, which were here preserved as ancestral heirlooms, all bore their part in giving to the place the secluded and familiar air of a cherished home. Thus, the first evening of her visit proved one of unmixed satisfaction, and the night that followed, brought with it sweet and dreamless rest.</p>
			<p>“Do you feel equal to a short walk, my dear?” said Madam Percival, as she joined her young friends on the verandah the next morning, and addressed herself to Mabel, who, under Bessie’s instruction, was becoming acquainted with every feature in the wide landscape.</p>
			<p>Mabel promptly replied in the affirmative.</p>
			<p>“Then,” said Madam Percival, “I should be happy to have you both go with me to the house of my son’s agent. It is only about half a mile distant; you can see the smoke from the chimney yonder; the path leads directly through the maple grove, which will furnish us with a gay carpet and awning, and the good man’s wife will give us all a hearty welcome, I am sure.”</p>
			<p>Bessie, no less than Mabel, expressed her pleasure at the proposition, and, while the latter went to her room to prepare for the walk, the former ran for her own and her grandmother’s bonnets.</p>
			<p>“Now, my dear,” said Madam Percival, as she took Mabel’s offered arm, bearing no weight upon it, however, for she was at present the stronger of the two,⁠—“I must tell you something of the individual whom we hope to see this morning.” She then proceeded with an interesting narative of their trusty farm-agent’s experiences, dated from the young man’s arrival in the West, and continued up to the present period. He had brought a small sum of money with him, but his first investment had been disastrous, the situation of his land proving unhealthy, and his crops suffering from blight; while, to crown his misfortunes, the title to his estate became a matter of dispute, and he suddenly found himself involved in legal difficulties. It was at this crisis, that he was first brought to the notice of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival, to whom he applied for professional assistance; and Bayard’s favorable impressions of the man being confirmed by a slight knowledge which his mother had previously gained of his character and worth, a proposition was made and accepted, which proved equally advantageous to both parties; the young lawyer, who was now oppressed with business, gaining a valuable and reliable agent, and the disappointed, but manly and energetic farmer, obtaining a sure and gradually increasing competence.”</p>
			<p>“And how ended the law-suit?” asked Mabel.</p>
			<p>“It resulted in favor of my son’s client,” replied Madam Percival, “and he still holds possession of his estate, which, in spite of its disadvantages, has nearly doubled in value.”</p>
			<p>“And this is the farm-house!” said Mabel, as they now came in sight of a comfortable two story dwelling, surrounded by spacious and substantial barns and granaries. “How neat and thrifty everything looks!”</p>
			<p>“That is due in no small degree to our farmer’s wife,” said Madam Percival; “she is one of the most good-humored, capable, and industrious women in the neighborhood, and very attractive too, as you will think when you see her pretty, round face. That row of glittering pans and pails hanging outside the house, will give you an idea of the extent of her dairy, and it was some of her sweet butter which you praised at breakfast. We may go in without knocking,” she continued, as they approached,⁠—“our good housewife is always ready for company.”</p>
			<p>Thus invited, Mabel entered at the door which stood hospitably open, and passed on to a sitting-room on the right. It was furnished in the simple style of a farmer’s family; was in perfect order, and unoccupied; there seemed nothing to startle and astonish a visitor, and yet Mabel stopped short, and stood gazing at the opposite window, like one lo in a dream. What was there in a little rush-bottomed arm-chair, a wooden foot-stool, an old leather-covered bible, and an open daguerreotype case, which could have power to transfix her in silent wonder, and send the tears coursing down her cheek?⁠—what but the power of association,⁠—that deep, magnetic thrill with which we gaze on the simplest memorials of one who has passed from earth, but still lives enshrined amid love’s sacred memories? what but the holy awe which fills the soul as imagination calls up in vivid array, the form, the countenance, the voice, of one whose mortal has put on immortality?</p>
			<p>Yes, there was no mistaking these mute witnesses, which had seemed a part of Rosy’s little life; and for an instant Mabel stood transfixed opposite the vacant arm-chair, tearful, bewildered, and unconscious of the surprise she herself excited in Madam Percival and Bessie by her singular demeanor. The next moment, a door opened from the kitchen, and an elderly woman, with an infant in her arms, entered, and was advancing with a respectful air to speak to Madam Percival, but, seeing Mabel, she stopped short, uttered an exclamation of joy, and forgetting her customary awe of her more stately visitor,⁠—forgetting everything but the engrossing interest of the moment, she placed the child, without apology, in Bessie’s arms, and exclaiming in a broken voice, “Dear Miss Mabel! my own darling child’s best friend!” she ran towards the latter, threw her arms impulsively around her, then sat down in Rosy’s chair, covered her face with her hands, and wept.</p>
			<p>Mabel, who at the sound of her voice had recognized the mother of Rose, and had cordially returned her greeting, now turned to Madam Percival to ask an explanation from one who, on her part, wore a countenance full of astonishment and inquiry, when Lydia, who had been summoned by a loud cry from the baby, made her appearance on the scene, smoothing down her apron, and buttoning the sleeves which had been turned up to her elbows. If Madam Percival and Bessie were already astonished spectators, it may well be believed that their amazement now reached its height, as Lydia, the same excitable creature as ever, gave a sudden start, threw herself on her knees beside Mabel, caught her hand, kissed it repeatedly, laughed, cried, then laughed again, and, snatching her infant from Bessie, placed it in Mabel’s arms, saying, “See my baby! isn’t she a beauty?” and finally burst into tears once more, as she whispered, “Her name is Rose.”</p>
			<p>“Excuse us, Ma’am! excuse us, Miss Bessie!” said she, as, with an attempt to recover her self-possession, she came forward to pay her respects to Madam Percival and her granddaughter, “but Miss Vaughan has been such an angel of goodness to us, and our dear little Rose loved her so much!”</p>
			<p>The excuse was not needed, however, as was evident from the cordial sympathy which shone in Madam Percival’s face, as she gleaned from the mutual expressions of interest which were exchanged between Mabel and these humble friends, the nature of the tie which bound them so strongly to one another; and the good-hearted Bessie had only waited to be relieved from the care of the child, to turn her face towards the window and wipe away a tear.</p>
			<p>“I have been telling you, my dear, as we came through the wood,” said Madam Percival to Mabel, who was caressing the infant, “the experience of a mutual friend of ours, but I little suspected that I was omitting the most interesting feature of the tale; here he is, however, to speak for himself. Good morning, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowst! You are the only person wanting to make this scene complete.”</p>
			<p>The astonishment of Mabel, the blushing bashfulness of Lydia, the contented smile of her mother, the crowing applause on the part of the baby, and the sympathetic satisfaction of Madam Percival and Bessie, indeed reached their climax, as the sturdy form of the honest Owen now appeared in the door-way, his eye bright with pleasure, and his face glowing with earnestness. “Miss Vaughan!” exclaimed he, taking off his hat, and coming forward with both his strong, hard hands extended, “this is a day to be thankful for, and a sight to make a humble man proud.”</p>
			<p>“You speak the truth, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dowst,” said Mabel. “Such a home, and wife, and child, and good name, as you can call yours, are indeed something to be proud of; and I am proud, I assure you, to claim you as an old friend.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, miss,” said Owen, with his own genial smile, “I’ve many blessings as you say, but it’s the crowning one of all that brings you under our roof. Where is my little woman?” continued he, searching round the room with his eyes for Lydia, who stood behind him, with a modest, blushing face. “She’s been looking forward to this day ever since she first set foot on a prairie, though one would think to see her now, that she was ashamed of being an honest man’s wife.”</p>
			<p>“She is ashamed of having kept her secret from me so long,” said Mabel. “What will the boys say when they learn that Lydia is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen Dowst?”</p>
			<p>“Well, ’twas all along of her love for you, Miss Mabel,” said Owen, apologetically. “Owen, says she, don’t you hint to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harry Vaughan, or any of ’em, who you’ve got for a wife,⁠—just wait till Miss Mabel comes into these parts, and sees for herself.”</p>
			<p>“A true woman,” interposed Madam Percival. “I can understand it, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dowst, for, old as I am, I have been counting ever since Miss Vaughan arrived on her surprise at finding your husband settled among us, little suspecting that there was a still greater pleasure in store for her.”</p>
			<p>“And how is Jack?” asked Mabel, when, composure being at length restored, she found herself seated next to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, who had by this time claimed her sacred prerogative,⁠—the charge of Rosy’s namesake.</p>
			<p>“Bless your heart, dear, for remembering my boy!” said the mother, with animation. “Lyddy is a good child, and never shows any of her little tempers now-a-days, and Owen has been a faithful friend to me and mine, first for Rosy’s sake, and then for the love that grew out of that; but I sometimes think it’s Jack, after all, that’s to be the joy of my old age. There never was a mother had a better son, Miss Mabel. He’s foreman of some works not far from here, where they manufacture farming machines; he always was an ingenious fellow, and what with Rosy helping him with his plans and figures, and so on, he got an extra good idea of mechanics, and now it stands him in good stead. He makes a handsome living,⁠—Jack does,⁠—and is frugal, too, though he’s got an open hand and heart.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I am very glad!” said Mabel. “I always liked Jack; I thought he would live to be a comfort to you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope.”</p>
			<p>“How could he help it?” asked the widow in a low, earnest voice. “As long as Rosy lived, didn’t he have his sister to keep him in the right way? and ever since she died, hasn’t he had an angel? Jack was a silent boy, always; and he’s a silent sort of a man. He don’t tell his mind as some folks do, but if you could see him when he sits down in <em>her</em> chair, or reads in <em>her</em> bible, or calls this baby by <em>her</em> name, you’d think as I do, that though it’s a voice for the heart only, Rosy, like the holy man in Scripture, ‘being dead, yet speaketh.’ ”</p>
			<p>“She does indeed speak to us all,” said Mabel. “Though her life was short and full of suffering, it is a beautiful thought how many have been made better for the dear child’s having lived, and loved, and died. I, as well as Jack, have often felt, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, that the memory of Rose’s virtues was like a continual message of good cheer from a glorified saint.”</p>
			<p>“She was a precious lamb!” said the mother, sobbing. “The Lord has her in His holy keeping. I only hope we’ll all find our way one of these days into that same fold.”</p>
			<p>“Such heartfelt gratitude and affection as have been manifested towards you to-day, my dear,” said Madam Percival to Mabel, when they were once more returning homeward through the grove, “are a sweet compensation for the hours stolen from gayer pleasures and devoted to works of charity and love.”</p>
			<p>“The sincere regard of these good friends is of priceless value to me,” answered Mabel, “but it is a voluntary offering, not a compensation. The hours were few, indeed, which, during my New York life, were devoted to anything but selfish pleasures. This family is the only one to whom I rendered the slightest service, and in this instance I was always the principal gainer. I can feel nothing but mortification, when I reflect how wholly I neglected my opportunities of usefulness.”</p>
			<p>“You do yourself an injustice,” said Madam Percival. “I have not yet to learn the particulars of your kindness to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope and her sick child. They have been related to me with all a mother’s enthusiasm, though I never until now knew the name of Rosy’s benefactor. I was peculiarly interested in the account, for I, too, had some tender recollections of Rose, having seen her frequently, when many years ago she was under medical treatment at a public institution in New York; and I could in some degree estimate the love she cherished for you, my dear, when I learned that she bequeathed you, as a dying legacy, a little engraving, originally presented to her by my son, and always prized (so her mother tells me) as zealously as when her intense admiration for it first appealed to Bayard’s generosity. Have you the picture yet?”</p>
			<p>“I have,” said Mabel. “It hangs in our parlor at home;” and as she spoke she called to mind the interest, even amounting to curiosity, with which Percival, on his recent visit, had appeared to examine both engraving and frame, no doubt identifying them as having once been his property.</p>
			<p>“Its subject is one,” said Madam Percival, “which appealed strongly to the child’s heart, and which she fully exemplified in her life. She has long since gained the rest of the Eternal City; but her works yet follow her, and the road which her feet have trod is fragrant with her virtues, encouraging the succession of pilgrims who follow in her pathway, to exclaim, with consecrated purpose and will, ‘In the name of our God, will we set up our banners!’ ”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
