<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Fear is the virtue of slaves; but the heart that loveth is willing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perfect was, before God, and perfect is Love, and Love only.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Longfellow’s Tegner.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>On a pleasant midsummer’s afternoon, a middle-aged lady, with a mild and thoughtful face, sat alone in her quiet parlor, busily engaged in sewing. It was a country home in which she dwelt, and her low window opened directly into a green and sloping orchard, now fragrant with new-mown hay, the sweet breath of which was borne in on every passing breeze. She was a woman of many cares, and but little leisure, and for more than an hour had not lifted her eyes from her work, when, suddenly attracted by the merry voices of children, she arrested herself in the act of setting a stitch, and, with her needle still poised between finger and thumb, leaned her elbow on the window-sill and for several minutes gazed earnestly and attentively upon a little group collected beneath an opposite tree. They were too far off for their words to be distinguishable, but happiness shone in their faces, mirth rang in their careless shout, and joy danced in all their motions. Whether chasing the light butterfly, pelting each other with tufts of hay, or, in the very exuberance of their spirits, scampering without purpose or rest in the sunshine, they were in every view pictures of infant glee, cheering and happy sights to a mother’s heart. Though now and then smiling on their sport, however, the gentle-faced lady at the window was watching them with a more thoughtful and observant gaze than the occasion seemed to warrant, for she saw amid their play what a less careful eye might have failed to discern, and from it she drew a moral.</p>
			<p>Three among this little group, were her own children; but while they shared her notice, and from time to time excited her sympathy in their innocent enjoyment, it was not by them that her thoughts were at this time peculiarly engrossed.</p>
			<p>There was among them a fourth, who, although not hers by the tie of nature, might almost be said to have become so by adoption, since she had now been three years under her roof, with the prospect of continuing there for an indefinite period; and it was on this little girl, who stood to her in the relation of a pupil, that the teacher’s thoughtful attention was fixed.</p>
			<p>She was between eleven and twelve years of age, and the eldest of the little band; a bright, rosy-cheeked, animated child, of a lively, adventurous spirit, the invariable leader in every youthful pastime. But on the present occasion she seemed only partially to share in the sport, for after every outburst of glee in which she indulged, far outdoing her companions in extravagant merriment, and inciting them to new hilarity, she would hastily resume her seat at the foot of an old apple-tree, snatch a well-worn book from the grass where she had thrown it, and appear for a time wholly engrossed in study. Her fits of diligence, however, were but short lived. At the first temptation held out by her companions, she would again fling aside the volume, spring to her feet, and bound with them to the farthest corner of the orchard, from which excursion she would return, heated, weary, and out of breath. Now a mischievous urchin had stolen her bonnet, and dared her to its recovery; and now a pet rabbit had just rushed past, and she must follow with the others in full pursuit. It was in vain that after each fresh interruption she applied herself anew to her lesson, and placing her fingers to her ears, strove to shut out the bewildering voices of her playmates. The effort, after all, was but a mock endeavor, for her heart was anywhere but in her book; and, at length, an unseen hand having snatched the much abused grammar from her lap and thrown it over the boundary wall, the unwilling student felt a sense of relief at its disappearance, and was the first to raise the shout of approval that succeeded.</p>
			<p>Just at this moment a bell sounded, and with a glance of surprise and alarm in the direction of the house, the girl hastened to recover the book and proceed to her recitation, for which this was the signal.</p>
			<p>She came into the presence of her instructress with a flushed face, and, in place of her recent smiles, a half-mortified, half-vexed expression.</p>
			<p>The teacher took the book from her pupil’s hand without comment, and commenced hearing the lesson, which, as may well be supposed, proved a failure in the very onset.</p>
			<p>The child stood in silence for a few moments, and then said, while tears of impatience rushed into her eyes, “I can’t learn this lesson, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, it is too hard.”</p>
			<p>“You have not tried, Mabel,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, mildly.</p>
			<p>“Yes I have,” answered Mabel; “I have tried just as hard as I could, and I can’t learn it. I wish I needn’t study Latin.”</p>
			<p>“Were you studying, my dear, when you lay for ten minutes hid in the hay, while the children tried in vain to find you, or when you stood on the highest bough of a cherry-tree and strained your eyes with looking into a robin’s nest?”</p>
			<p>Mabel gave a quick glance out of the window from whence she had thus been observed, then looked up into the friendly face of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, and seeing there a smile, which invited confidence and disarmed her of timidity, exclaimed, with natural and childlike frankness, “How could I study any better, when they were all having such a good time?”</p>
			<p>“Ah! that is the true secret of the matter,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, drawing Mabel towards her and wiping the moisture from the child’s heated brow. “I have been watching you for this half hour, and knew very well how it would be with the lesson. Do you remember what I told you about it this morning?”</p>
			<p>“You said it was hard, the hardest thing in the book.”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly, my dear; I told you, to be sure, that it was more difficult than any task you had yet attempted; but, at the same time, I assured you that with a little patience you could quickly learn it, and that this verb once mastered, all the rest would seem comparatively easy. I did not promise, however, that you would find the orchard a good place to study in, or that the noise of the children would help you to fix your thoughts on your book. You should have gone to your own room, shut the door, and made up your mind to apply yourself diligently for an hour at least. Will you do so now?”</p>
			<p>Mabel hesitated, gave a longing look at her recent playground, and then cast down her eyes, which were fast filling with tears.</p>
			<p>After waiting in vain for a reply, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert passed her arm round the waist of her pupil, fixed her mild eyes upon her face with a look which enforced attention, and gently but forcibly made use of such arguments as were most likely to excite her ambition and prompt her to the necessary effort. The girl was possessed of excellent capacity, but had not yet formed habits of application, and needed powerful motives to stimulate her to exertion. These <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was able to supply, and soon had the satisfaction of witnessing the effect produced by her words, for Mabel gradually withdrew from her side, straightened her figure with a determined air, and exclaimed, with energy, “I suppose I <em>can</em> learn it, and I <em>will</em>.”</p>
			<p>“And remember,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, as she bestowed a glance of affectionate interest and approval upon her hastily retreating pupil, “remember for your encouragement what I told you yesterday, that the more perfectly you learn this one lesson, the easier will every future task become.”</p>
			<p>It was the verb <i xml:lang="la">amāre</i>⁠—to love⁠—of the first regular conjugation, and a formidable task did it appear in Mabel’s eyes.</p>
			<p>She was, however, possessed of an excellent memory, and every requisite for successful study, and bringing, as she now did, her whole heart to the labor, she was able in less than the allotted time, to overcome all its difficulties.</p>
			<p>Before the hour had expired, she presented herself once more, grammar in hand, and her face bright with smiles, to beg that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert would hear her recite, assuring her that she knew every word perfectly, and had twice repeated the synopsis to herself without looking on the book. It was true, and the young student went triumphantly through the lesson.</p>
			<p>“And see,” exclaimed she, as, after receiving the praise her efforts had merited, she took the grammar from her teacher’s hand, “it is just as you said. I have been looking at the verb that comes next, and it is so much like this that it will not be hard at all,” and Mabel eagerly pointed out the tokens of similarity.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, smiling at the little girl’s earnestness, suggested still further marks of resemblance, congratulated Mabel upon the advantage she had gained, and then, laying her hand upon the child’s shoulder, said, impressively, “And so it is with life, my dear Mabel. The great lesson of love once learned, learned patiently, truly, and with the whole heart, not carelessly scanned, or foolishly toyed with, but diligently received into the soul, and planted there forever⁠—this lesson will relieve all life’s trials and illumine all its mysteries. But, believe me, my child, it is seldom learned amid life’s sunshine and its joy. Its teachings come to us in the silent chambers of thought, when noise is shut out, and the voice of mirth for a time is stilled, and eager pleasure gives place to patient duty. While chasing the butterflies of folly, or wasting the summer hours in play, we cannot take life’s great lesson to heart; but, planted perhaps in sorrow, and nourished perhaps in tears, it will one day blossom in joy and peace. Rouse yourself to this last lesson, Mabel, bring to it your soul’s best powers, pursue it with the energy which has been victorious to-day, and I shall have no fear for your future.”</p>
			<p>Mabel did not quite understand at the time, the full force of these spontaneous words, which, prompted by earnest feeling, took rather the form of soliloquy, than an address suited to the child’s years. But they were not lost upon her. Like seeds of future promise, they were planted in her young heart; memory kept them warm, and at last, matured by time, they brought forth fruits unto righteousness.</p>
			<p>And once again. When Mabel had reached her eighteenth year, and the summons had at length been received, which was to call the pupil from the teacher who, during more than half of the young girl’s existence, had been to her less an instructress than a parent, words of a similar import were the last warning and the last charge which fell from the revered lips of age and experience upon the listening ear of youth.</p>
			<p>“Learn above all things, my dear girl,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, as they sat together the evening before Mabel’s departure, “to beware of self-love, and cultivate to the utmost degree a universal charity. It is the best advice I can give you for your safety, and the surest for your happiness.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think me so selfish then?” exclaimed Mabel, half grieved at the implication conveyed in her teacher’s words. “Oh, there are so many whom I love better than myself!”</p>
			<p>“I accuse you of no unamiable quality, my dear Mabel, and your generosity has always been proverbial among us; but, when I charge you to cultivate love for others, even to the forgetfulness of self, you must not misunderstand my meaning. It is because it is so easy and natural to you, my dear child, to love all and everybody, that I wish to warn you of a time, when, instead of being your happiness, and so demanding of you no sacrifice, it may become your trial and your misery; and it is then that I bid you love on as woman can and must. O, Mabel, there is nothing so insidious as self-love, nothing so noble and so womanly as that divine love which finds its happiness in duty.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s voice trembled with emotion as she spoke, and had anything been wanting to impress her words upon Mabel’s heart, that want would have been supplied when she looked in the face of her revered friend, and felt that the lesson she was now so earnestly imparting, was one taught her by experience and proved by faithful practice.</p>
			<p>Amid the pain of parting with old friends, and the joys and hopes attendant upon her entrance into a new home, this lesson, and that equally impressive one of her early childhood which it had served to call up, were both for a time effaced from Mabel’s recollection. But they were not lost. There are lessons which penetrate our hearts like Heaven-sent whisperings, lessons, simply spoken, scarce heeded when uttered, but proving by their deep and lasting influence that they have their source in the eternal fountain of truth.</p>
			<p>And so it was with these simple teachings of a faithful, true-hearted woman. It was not the power with which they were spoken, it was not eloquence nor a passion-stirring voice, nor was it the effect of time or circumstance, that stamped them so indelibly on Mabel’s heart, but nevertheless they struck upon a chord within, which thrilled at the word, and vibrating through many years, reminded her again and again of the Heavenly lesson which her soul needed for its purification.</p>
			<p>It was long before the page fully unfolded itself on which that lesson of love was written, and only by years of patient striving were its difficulties overcome; but often amid the struggle did memory whisper in Mabel’s ear the encouraging assurance, that this task once learned, the rest of life’s path would be made easy.</p>
			<p>And is it not so? Is not woman’s mission truly a mission of love? And can she fail to fulfil all its duties nobly, and find all its trials lightened and relieved when she has once taken to heart that lesson, once fortified herself with that spirit so beautifully exemplified in Him whose life on earth was a glorious manifestation of love made perfect?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
