<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>And some we trusted with a fond believing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Have turned and stung us to the bosom’s core⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And life hath seemed but as a vain deceiving,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From which we turn aside⁠—heart-sick and sore.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">M. T. W.</abbr> Chandler.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The early spring months had passed away, the silent process of nature had nearly reached its full development, and summer was close at hand. The city parks were carpeted with a bright green sod, and the elm trees waved over them the opening buds and tassels of verdure, which were daily forming a thicker and thicker canopy of shade. Birds sang in the branches, and now and then perched on the eaves or open windows of the tall city houses, while the soft breezes, the warmth of the mid-day sun, the sound of children’s voices, and the glow of animal life and spirit which pervaded the streets and thoroughfares, gave evidence of the renewing and revivifying power with which summer and sunshine penetrate even to the heart of the great metropolis.</p>
			<p>It was a lovely morning, towards the close of the month of May, when Mabel, with a miniature watering-pot in her hand, stood listlessly gazing from out her dressing-room window into a beautiful open square directly opposite. She had been engaged in watering a few plants, Harry’s thoughtful gift many months before; but her mind had wandered from her occupation, and though her eye was fixed upon the sunny green sward of the little park, the dreamy smile upon her countenance proclaimed her to be roaming far away in the pleasant fields of imagination. Home still had its cares; the present, its bitterness; the future, its anxiety; but these had no part in her present reverie, for, giving the reins to a charmed fancy, and, for the time, banishing every painful thought, she was dwelling with fond and eager anticipation upon that ever fruitful prospect of enjoyment, a young girl’s first journey.</p>
			<p>Even before she left school, when all the pleasures of freedom were yet untasted, there had been no theme more exciting to her youthful enthusiasm, than the confident hope of one day visiting the romantic Falls of Trenton, the gigantic cataract of Niagara, and the <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence, with its Thousand Isles⁠—national elements of beauty and grandeur, with which she rightly deemed it desirable to become acquainted, before indulging still more glowing anticipations of foreign travel.</p>
			<p>These were but vague yearnings, however, in comparison with the alluring visions which had recently been awakened in her youthful and ardent nature, by one who, himself familiar with the beauties of American scenery, possessed the power to kindle her imagination and excite her feelings by his animated description of the scenes of his boyish homage.</p>
			<p>And if the eloquent tongue of Dudley had power to clothe these grand and picturesque regions with a new halo of beauty and romance, it may well be believed that Mabel’s heart was stirred with no common glow of delighted anticipation, at the added hope she was now indulging, of visiting these favored spots in his companionship, being initiated by him into the peculiar charms which pertain to each, and being suffered to believe that the sight of her fresh enjoyment would awaken in him a pleasure, equal, if not superior, to that he had once experienced in his own.</p>
			<p>Early in the spring, when Mabel’s friends were discussing their plans for the season, she had frequently mentioned her expectation of spending the month of June in travelling. As the time drew near, however, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan declared his engagements to be such as to forbid all thought of the journey, she freely expressed, amid her own little circle, the disappointment which she felt at the project’s being thus unexpectedly abandoned.</p>
			<p>“Why cannot we make an excursion party to the Falls?” exclaimed Dudley, one evening when, a small party being assembled in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s drawing-room, the subject was accidentally introduced.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Broadhead, does the idea strike you agreeably? Come, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle; you just confessed yourself at a loss how to get rid of next month,”⁠—and turning to various others, who chanced to be present, he found some ingenious method of recommending his proposition to each.</p>
			<p>The challenge, though playfully made, met with general acceptance, and Dudley had the satisfaction of seeing his apparently careless suggestion acted upon at once. Most of the company consisted of this world’s idlers,⁠—the acknowledged drones of society, who were restricted by no claims of business or of duty,⁠—and the plan and route which Dudley proceeded to sketch were unanimously adopted.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy had left New York early in May, to attend to some important transactions at the West, and Louise was at liberty to follow her own inclinations; while Mabel, never doubting the consent of her indulgent father, lent a ready ear to a scheme which she believed to be designed for her especial benefit.</p>
			<p>Thus a plan was concerted, which, gaining in popularity from day to day, soon became the engrossing topic of interest and conversation between Mabel and her friends; and while all found in it a welcome source of pleasure, Mabel’s heart thrilled with a dreamy ecstacy of delight, as she listened to the low-spoken words of hope and expectation which Dudley breathed into her ear, as he talked of the promised journey, or as she pondered in secret on the vague, half-uttered terms in which he confessed his happiness to be in this, as in all things, dependent on her own.</p>
			<p>None of the party were willing to leave New York until after a fashionable and long-talked-of wedding reception, which was to take place at a country seat a few miles from the city, and, in anticipation of which, the fashionable world had been content to linger in town to a later period than usual.</p>
			<p>This festive occasion was now close at hand, and, as Mabel stood at the window and counted up the days which must elapse before the commencement of her little tour, her pleasant reflections were interrupted by the thought, that she had not yet found an opportunity to broach the matter to her father. So confident was she, however, that the independence she had hitherto enjoyed would not be interfered with in this particular, that she was dismissing the subject from her mind, with the simple conclusion, I must not forget to mention it to him to-morrow,⁠—when her meditations were still further disturbed by the unusual sound of his footsteps within her room, and looking up, she found him close beside her with an open letter in his hand.</p>
			<p>He replied at once to the inquiring expression of her face, saying, “I have news from your Aunt Margaret, my dear.”</p>
			<p>Mabel started, and a look of sudden alarm passed over her face, for her Aunt Sabiah had left them a week before, in compliance with an invitation to pass the summer with her recently widowed sister, and Mabel feared some accident had befallen her. “Is anything the matter?” asked she quickly. “Aunt Sabiah⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Your aunts are both well,” interrupted her father; “this letter is in reply to a message I sent by your Aunt Sabiah last week; it comes very opportunely,⁠—it is very kind, very hospitable in your Aunt Margaret; it gratifies me exceedingly,” and he handed the letter for her perusal.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s face was expressive of mingled emotions as she read, but puzzled surprise predominated; and as she finished, she looked up with the abrupt remark, “About Harry? I do not understand it father.”</p>
			<p>“Harry goes to L. next week,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, speaking decidedly, with compressed lips, and in a tone which deprecated curiosity or inquiry. “He is to study law with my old friend, Judge Paradox, and will commence immediately.”</p>
			<p>Mabel was about to express astonishment at this sudden choice of a profession, and question her father more closely, but observing the expression of his countenance, she checked herself, satisfied rather to await such explanation as he might think proper to give.</p>
			<p>He gave none, however, but, as if deeming the announcement of his intentions with regard to Harry sufficient, went on to say, in quick disjointed sentences, and much as if soliloquizing, “Your aunt not only proposes to receive Harry until his rooms are in readiness, but gives you, I think, a very cordial invitation to accompany him. I am very glad of this,⁠—I wish you to know your aunt,⁠—I have not seen her myself for these five years,⁠—it will be pleasant for you to be with Harry, and the plan will in every way be a great relief to me. I have just heard from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, and find that my affairs will compel me to join him at the West, immediately; so I shall close the house, and come to L. to meet you when I return, which I hope will be before many weeks. I dread the journey very much, but it cannot be postponed any longer.”</p>
			<p>Mabel’s countenance fell, as she listened to this programme of her father’s intentions and wishes; even the sight of his haggard and anxious face, failed to win her from the contemplation of her own disappointment. She stood silent and thoughtful, looked out of the window, bit her lip, and made no reply.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who was slowly pacing the room, glanced up at length, as if awaiting some response to his own expressions of satisfaction, and then said, watching her face meanwhile, and speaking in the tone of considerate kindness with which he always addressed her⁠—“I hope you like the plan, my daughter; your Aunt Margaret is a stranger, to be sure, but Sabiah is there, you know.” Already he had detected her repugnance to the arrangement, and was solicitous to place it in the best possible light.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Mabel, hesitating, “but I was in hopes”⁠—</p>
			<p>Her voice faltered as she spoke, but her father reassured her, drawing near, standing with his hands clasped behind him, and patiently awaiting what she had to say, while he aided her with the inquiry⁠—“What did you hope, my dear? had you any other plan at heart?”</p>
			<p>Thus encouraged, she acknowledged the scheme of pleasure which she found it so hard to forego, explained the route, enumerated the party, and, while she forbore to urge the point, made no secret of her preference.</p>
			<p>“Louise is going?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, as he thoughtfully resumed his walk up and down the room.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“And Harry?” added he, with hesitation, “did he expect to make one of the party?”</p>
			<p>“No,” answered Mabel, with a thrill of pain which was like the sting of conscience, for she well knew that no one had requested Harry’s company on the excursion.</p>
			<p>“And you are very anxious to go?”</p>
			<p>“I was,” said Mabel, hesitatingly, “Yes.” And with nervous agitation she stood picking the withered leaves from a geranium, while she awaited her father’s decision.</p>
			<p>Her cause was in safe hands. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had no courage to disappoint her; he could far better bear to be disappointed himself. So, after a short pause, he said, “Very well, you shall do as you please, my dear; only I hope in the course of the summer you will find time to make your aunt Margaret a short visit, at least. Suppose you answer the letter, and tell her you will come in July or August.”</p>
			<p>Mabel promised to do so, and the matter being settled, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who had no time to waste, hurried away to his office.</p>
			<p>Mabel stood and looked after him as he crossed the little park⁠—her kind, indulgent father, who could refuse her nothing. How she thanked and blessed him! Her aged and care-worn father, with a stooping gait and a shadow on his brow,⁠—was the deeper whisper of her conscience. Did she deserve from him a blessing in return?</p>
			<p>Her pathway, it is true, is free. He has left her at liberty to go when and where she will; his restraining hand places no clog upon her footsteps, his love has broken down every barrier to her looked-for happiness⁠—every barrier save one, and that a dull, heavy, impatient knocking at her heart, an intruding thought, a stern and solemn appeal, striving to make itself heard. Shall she give the strange, unwelcome guest admittance?</p>
			<p>The question was answered by the sudden entrance of Louise, who was full of excitement in view of the approaching wedding and pleasure-party, and whose voluble tongue soon put to flight every serious thought which had taken possession of her sister’s mind. She was criticising and commenting upon various rich articles of dress which formed a part of Mabel’s spring wardrobe, when a figure of ample proportions presented itself within the door of the dressing-room, and a loud voice exclaimed, “Ah, here you are! Cecilia admitted me, and I ventured to come up stairs without waiting to be invited. Oh, Mabel, what a sweet bonnet!⁠—fresh from Paris, I’ll bet a trifle! And this is your travelling suit⁠—a shade darker than Vic’s, but beautifully trimmed, isn’t it Lu?” And the stout <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, exhausted and breathless, sank panting upon the sofa.</p>
			<p>“Throw off your mantle, and take a seat at this open window,” said Mabel, observing the flushed and heated condition of her visitor.</p>
			<p>“No, no, thank you, let me sit here,” replied the lady, taking a fan which Mabel offered, and fanning herself vigorously. “Oh, these are lovely!” observed she, examining some rich flounced silks which, just received from the dressmaker’s, hung over the arm of the couch. “That shade of green is very trying, though, and the pink is rather pale. I dare say it will light up well, though. Vanity of vanities!” she continued, in a theatrical manner, uttering at the same time something between a sigh and an endeavor to catch her breath; “What would <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lincoln Dudley say, with his contempt for finery, if he should see all this exhibition of the fine arts, as he calls it?”</p>
			<p>Mabel looked up quickly, as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker thus quoted her friend, but the tongue of the loquacious lady did not need even the encouragement of a look.</p>
			<p>“I declare, girls,” exclaimed she, “I say to you as I said to Vic, this morning,⁠—I almost wish <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley wasn’t going with us on our journey. I can’t say I think him much of an addition to the party, he has become such a stoic⁠—cynic, I mean,” added she, after a pause, during which she discovered her mistaken use of terms.</p>
			<p>Mabel turned away and smiled⁠—not at the mistake, but at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker’s desire to exclude <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley from a party of his own arranging, into which she had intruded herself and her daughter, uninvited.</p>
			<p>“Is he a cynic?” said Louise, absently. “Mabel, what did De Trou make you pay for those flowers?”</p>
			<p>“To be sure he is,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, replying to the first question. “I don’t know any better name for him. You heard how he abused every body and every thing that night at your house; and last evening I met him at the Earle’s, and such a setting-down as he gave the New Yorkers!⁠—so many jackanapes among the young men⁠—so many fine women spoiled by fashion! I assure you, I felt myself called upon to act as their champion, and trust I was tolerably successful. I talked him down, at all events⁠—that was one comfort.”</p>
			<p>“It must have required a large stock of words, I should think, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, to defend so poor a cause,” said Mabel, betraying in her manner, no less than her remark, a disposition to justify Dudley’s severity.</p>
			<p>“A poor cause!” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker. “So you side with my lord Dudley, do you, Mabel, and condemn society in the same wholesale manner? Well, I have understood you were a pupil of his.”</p>
			<p>“I do not speak of society generally,” resumed Mabel, “but an intellectual man, like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley, can not be expected to have much sympathy with silly women and coxcombs.”</p>
			<p>“And how many of us, do you suppose, he excludes from that list? Not me, though I came under the privileged head of ‘Present company,’ nor you, my dear,” added she with a coarse laugh, “though you are so ready to ratify his opinions. You had your share of the lash, as well as the rest of us; however, don’t look so crest-fallen,” added she, seeing Mabel suddenly change color and look down; “one must pay some penalty for being the most popular belle of the season; and if nobody finds fault with you but a crusty old bachelor, like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley, you mustn’t complain, even if the world does give him the credit of being a genius and all that.”</p>
			<p>“Old!” remarked Louise, who engaged in trying on Mabel’s new bonnet only caught a word, now and then, of a conversation to which she felt wholly indifferent. “I don’t call <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley old; he can’t be much over thirty.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know his age,” answered <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, tartly. “I only know he has outlived his good humor. Why, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle said something about Theodore Marston’s beauty and accomplishments, and the splendid establishment in which he would instate the lady of his choice,”⁠—and she gave a meaning glance at Mabel,⁠—“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley snarled as if somebody had stepped on his toes. I declare, if it had not always been said that he never bowed at any shrine, and was not a marrying man, I should certainly think he had been refused years ago by some reigning star, and had not yet recovered from the mortification. I suppose he comes under the head of ‘poor and proud,’ and that accounts for his being such a fault-finder.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I thought <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley liked society,” said Louise; “we always meet him everywhere.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, “and what is he there for? To play the agreeable in company, and abuse people behind their backs. Now, that is what I call being a downright hypocrite! For instance: we all know how much he has patronized Mabel this winter⁠—all because he thought it a feather in his cap to be in the van of her admirers⁠—and now, I will just tell what he said about her, if it’s only to convince the child that I didn’t waste words, as she calls it, without provocation.”</p>
			<p>Mabel stooped down and appeared to be busily searching for some missing article in her bureau drawer, while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker continued⁠—</p>
			<p>“You must know we were talking, as every body is now, about Fan Broadhead’s marriage with the colonel, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earle remarked that she thought it a capital match.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Capital!’ said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley, echoing <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earle’s words. ‘A most thorough-going, complete, and satisfactory conformity with the usages of society. Beauty, youth, and all the modern accomplishments set off against a town-house, a country-house, a cottage at Newport, and a carriage for every season of the year. Capital, upon my word!’</p>
			<p>“You can’t imagine,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, “how bitter and sarcastic his tone was; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle, who is Fan’s cousin, you know, could not help noticing it.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘So, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley,’ said he, ‘you don’t think there is much sentiment in the matter.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Sentiment,⁠—pshaw!’ said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley, ‘what has a fashionable girl to do with sentiment? The heart is the last thing to be consulted when a New York belle marries.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Why,’ said I, ‘there’s Mabel Vaughan and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker!” exclaimed Mabel, looking up with crimson face and flashing eyes, “how could you couple my name⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It was only by way of argument, my dear,” responded <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker.</p>
			<p>“Yes, but connected as you are,” faltered Mabel, “it would be thought⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nothing would be thought, but what is true, I suspect, or will be one of these days; if not, you can contradict the reports that are circulating, my dear; but let me go on with my story, and you shall judge what Lincoln Dudley’s opinion of you is.</p>
			<p>“ ‘There’s Mabel Vaughan and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston,’ said I, ‘they are both young, and handsome, and accomplished; do you mean to say that is a match where there is no romance, no affection between the parties?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘I do,’ said he, looking at me as if I had insulted him. ‘Miss Vaughan has too much sense to bestow her affections on such a paltry bit of frippery.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘And yet, you believe she will bestow her hand on him?’ said I.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I do not pretend to question it,’ said he, in his decided way. ‘Why should she not? All fashionable girls are alike; they live for the world, marry to please the world, and would die sooner than defy the world’s opinion. Love in a cottage is no longer to be thought of. I will venture to say that I do not know a woman in New York capable of sacrificing the love of display to any higher sentiment; and Miss Vaughan is the last who could be expected to prove an exception to the rule. She has passed through all the phases of a fashionable career, except the phase matrimonial,⁠—she will scarcely stop short of the blissful climax.’ ”</p>
			<p>“There, that was a long speech, but I treasured up every word of it, Mabel, for I was determined to tell you. I assure you I was quite indignant at hearing him talk as if girls now-a-days hadn’t any feeling. I gave him a pretty sharp piece of my mind, too, and I dare say he felt it, though he never made me a bit of an answer, but bowed all round the room, in his provokingly graceful manner, and went off as unconcerned as you please. What do you think now, Mabel, of the justice of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley’s criticisms?”</p>
			<p>Wounded feeling, pride, and indignation, were all depicted in Mabel’s countenance. “I think, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker,” said she, evading a direct reply, “that it is very unpleasant to be made the subject of a drawing-room discussion, and in future I must beg⁠—”</p>
			<p>“O, my dear,” interrupted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, in a conciliating tone, “it was not an occasion of any consequence, there were only half a dozen persons present, and I only mentioned you and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston, as an instance of a young couple who were every way suited to each other.”</p>
			<p>“But it was a very mistaken instance,” persisted Mabel. “I have no interest whatever in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston, and wish it to be so understood.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, la! what a fuss about nothing!” exclaimed Louise. “You know, May, if you are not engaged to Theodore Marston, very likely you will be one of these days,⁠—there is not another such match in the city.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Louise, I don’t know what you mean,” exclaimed Mabel, tears of vexation starting to her eyes.</p>
			<p>Louise only replied by glancing with an incredulous smile at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, at the same time humming a popular air, and practising before the mirror a few steps of a new and difficult dance. “It is growing very warm,” drawled she, in a languishing manner, “I must go before it is any hotter. You’ll call for me in good season Thursday morning, May. I wonder if Fan Broadhead will make a handsome bride.”</p>
			<p>“Wait a moment, Lu,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, snatching up her parasol and scarf, and looking about her for her gloves. “Vic will wonder what has become of me. So you don’t mean to have your engagement with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marston come out yet, pet?” said she, tapping Mabel lightly under the chin, as the latter stooped to pick up one of the fallen gloves.</p>
			<p>“No,⁠—never!” said Mabel, with a vehemence unusual to her.</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t say that,” replied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, coaxingly, as she squeezed through the doorway. “Ask Harry to come in, dear, and talk the journey over with us. Vic has twenty questions to put to him.”</p>
			<p>“Harry is not going on the journey,” said Mabel, quickly.</p>
			<p>“Not going!” ejaculated <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, in a tone of unmistakable chagrin. “Do you really mean so? Why, you astonish me. I took it for granted he was going,⁠—so did Vic. How came we to be so mistaken?”</p>
			<p>Mabel did not reply; and the dismayed lady, after repeated expressions of self-condolence, left the room, with the words, “I <em>am</em> disappointed,⁠—Harry not going,⁠—what will Vic say?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
