<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Buoyant, cheerful, happy, bright,⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see thee with a quiet grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Make sunlight in a shady place.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Story.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Mabel’s emotions on bidding farewell to the home of her girlhood were of a mingled character, pain alternating with pleasure, according as memory dwelt upon past joys, or anticipation pictured forth a brilliant future. Had she foreseen the length of time that would elapse ere she would again set foot in a spot endeared to her by a thousand associations, and had imagination hinted to her the changes which that time would effect, both in herself and in those she left behind, the fond whisperings of hope would have been silenced, and sorrow and regret would alone have filled her heart. But she had a happy, buoyant nature, and in planning schemes for many a summer excursion which should restore her to the old homestead, and many a winter vacation which should bring <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert and her children to share the hospitalities of her father’s roof, she forgot the possibility of the separation’s being otherwise than temporary.</p>
			<p>The moment of parting was indeed a trying one to her affectionate nature, and long after the intervening hills had shut even the village spire from her sight, her thoughts lingered with the beloved teacher and companions, whom she still seemed to see grouped together on the doorstep, where they had assembled to bid her a sad and tender farewell. But, although her travelling companions gave one day only to a trip which is usually performed in two, it afforded her ample time to rally from her grief, and long before the journey drew to its termination her busy fancy had taken another direction, and gone forth to rehearse the joys attendant upon her welcome home.</p>
			<p>She pictured to herself the reception she should probably meet from her father, whom she had not seen for months. Mabel had but little knowledge of him who stood to her in this tender relation, save from his occasional visits and periodical letters; and the former had often been suspended for years, owing to his absence from the country. He was, therefore, imaged to her mind as the tall, gray-haired gentleman, whom, some dozen times during her school life, she had been hastily summoned to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s parlor to see; each of which occasions was associated in her recollection with a holiday, a rich gift, and a drive to the railroad station, some six miles distant, to which she always accompanied him on his departure.</p>
			<p>That he was the most indulgent of men she had not a doubt, since she could remember no instance in which he had ever denied her requests, or refused to gratify her whims. Of his liberality, her gold watch, her jewelled rings, her well-stocked wardrobe, and ample allowance, had long since furnished evidence; nor, though he seldom gave expression to his feelings, could she be unconscious of the love and pride with which he watched the development of her intellect and her beauty, and triumphed in every added accomplishment and grace. Her intercourse with him, however, had been wanting in that familiarity which leads to confidence, and, being wholly unacquainted with his habits of life and mode of thought, her spirits always received a slight check, and her freedom a slight restraint, in his presence. His letters had been even less indicative of character than his visits; for, although kind, they were brief and somewhat formal, and, on the whole, he inspired in Mabel more of the respect and gratitude due to a thoughtful guardian, than the trusting love which is wont to subsist between a father and child.</p>
			<p>She felt conscious, however, that this restraint was unnatural, and as the time had now come when she was to make her father’s house her permanent abode, busy fancy suggested that the warmth with which he would welcome her to his heart and home would at once break down every barrier of reserve.</p>
			<p>Of her sister Louise, now <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, she had still less knowledge. She had seen her but twice since her marriage, and on each occasion for a few hours only. Once she had received a hasty note, informing her that a party, including the Leroys, were travelling in the vicinity of her school and would dine the following day at a neighboring town, where they begged that she would come and meet them. It was about a year after Louise’s marriage, and Mabel, then a child, obtained <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s consent to the plan, and returned in ecstacies with the whole party, especially her beautiful sister. Nor was this impression weakened when, a few years later, Louise accompanied her father on one of his periodical visits, and came, richly clad, to pass a day at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s; a day which served to heighten the young school-girl’s enthusiasm with regard to the surpassing charms of her sister, an enthusiasm which was kept alive, inasmuch as it was, to a great degree, shared by all her young companions. She looked forward, therefore, to daily companionship with one so lovely, accomplished and fascinating, as scarcely less an honor than a happiness.</p>
			<p>Nor in her visions of a joyous welcome did Mabel fail to give a prominent place to her little nephews, two beautiful boys, whom she had never yet seen; and, naturally warm of heart, extravagantly fond of children, and eminently qualified to excite affection on their part, it was no slight addition to her looked-for happiness that fancy pictured these little ones bounding to embrace an aunt whom they had doubtless already been taught to love.</p>
			<p>But, although father, sister, and nephews all figured in the vision which Mabel mentally formed of her future home, not one of them stood in the foreground of her imagination⁠—for memory furnished no link which associated them with the home of her infancy. Bright and joyous as her anticipations were of what these relatives might become to her in the future, there were no sweet, childish recollections connected with them, to awaken the tender thoughts which cling around a parent’s hearth. They were all, in truth, more or less strangers to her, and her conjectures concerning them, however pleasing, were necessarily vague and indistinct.</p>
			<p>But there was one member of her family whose very name was suggestive to Mabel’s heart of happiness, kindred, and home. There was one whose relation to herself was natural and true; who, from the cradle upwards, had shared her interests, her sorrows, and her joys; who had been the playmate of her infancy and the confidant and companion of her girlhood. Her dutiful affection for her father and her admiring love for her sister were of comparatively recent growth, but memory could recall no time when she had not dearly loved her brother. With him was connected every association of that early age when, shut out from the sympathy of the rest of the household, they were all in all to each other. Her mother’s neglect and her sister’s indifference were either unnoticed at the time or had long since been forgotten by Mabel; so, too, had the brilliant and richly furnished rooms from which she had often been banished in disgrace; but there still rose, fresh and clear to her recollection, the nursery where she and Harry played, the little hopes which they had mutually shared, and the little disappointments over which they had wept together. Nor were these tender memories all that had hallowed their affection; for, while time, separation, and absence, had built barriers between the other members of the family, Harry and Mabel had been in the habit of yearly intercourse, often passing many weeks in the enjoyment of each other’s society. Not only did they usually meet on occasion of the annual visit to old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan, but nearly all Harry’s school vacations were passed at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s, or at a boarding-place in the neighborhood, so that the happy home which Mabel had found with her kind instructress came to be considered scarcely less a home by Harry, who voluntarily went there for the holidays.</p>
			<p>A longer separation than usual intervened during two years which the latter passed at West Point; but this was atoned for by the happiness with which Mabel welcomed the young cadet on occasion of his short leave of absence, and the mingled pride and delight with which she listened to her schoolmates’ whispered encomiums of her soldier-brother.</p>
			<p>And when, a few months later, he engaged in a boyish frolic, and was suddenly dismissed from the Military Academy, whose strict rules he had infringed, Mabel readily accepted his apologies, allowed herself to be convinced that he was the most injured of mortals, and loved him all the more for the injustice he had suffered.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan then sent him abroad to spend two years at a German University, since which time he had been permitted to make the tour of Europe, a tour which the son had protracted beyond the original intentions of the father, but from which he had now unexpectedly returned.</p>
			<p>This long absence from Mabel, however, had only served to unite him more closely to her in interest and in heart. Their correspondence had been constant. It was, moreover, full, free and unrestrained, being not only a faithful communication of facts and events, a familiar interchange of thoughts and ideas, but an affectionate outpouring of mutual love.</p>
			<p>There was no corner of the old world which Harry’s foot had trod to which Mabel had not in spirit followed him; no city, river, or mountain which was not enshrined in her memory as the spot which had furnished Harry with some gay adventure, some historic musing, or some vision of glory; and there was no partner in his winter studies or summer wanderings who did not henceforth stand high in her regard, because he was her brother’s friend.</p>
			<p>Thus, from childhood upwards they had been united in each other’s love, and every year had but served to strengthen the bonds of mutual dependence and mutual trust. Isolated as both had been from any other strong family tie, the repose, the sympathy, the confiding love which are the most hallowed influences of home had been more fully perfected in their relation to each other, and ready as Mabel was to acknowledge the claims of the rest of her family, her heart assured her, as she drew near her father’s house, that it was Harry’s presence there which alone entitled it, in her estimation, to the name of home.</p>
			<p>The first intimation she had received of her brother’s return from his foreign tour, was contained in the recent letter from her father, which had summoned her to meet Harry in New York and preside over the festivities attendant upon the reunion of the long scattered family.</p>
			<p>“I cannot arrange matters,” wrote he, “so as to join you at any point on your journey; you will be rejoiced, however, to hear that not only Louise, the children and myself will be in New York to welcome you, but your brother Harry is on board the steamer which was yesterday reported at Halifax, and he will arrive here by to-morrow at the latest.”</p>
			<p>It was a dismal autumn afternoon when Mabel reached the city. She had travelled in company with a party of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s friends, of whose proffered attendance he had gladly availed himself, and, unfortunately for her hopes of a cordial greeting, she arrived one day sooner than had been anticipated. A less gay and joyous spirit than hers would perhaps have received a sudden check, at the air of soberness and gloom which the paternal mansion wore on her first entrance, at the utter silence which pervaded the hall and parlors, and the stately formality with which she was received by the grave and elderly footman. At first, indeed, she looked round in some anxiety, lest she had mistaken the house, especially, as the tall, stiff figure of a lady dressed in black was just disappearing, at the head of the staircase, with the air of one who is hastily retreating from the sight of visitors. Mabel knew of no such person in the family, and in order to quiet her doubts turned to the footman, and exclaimed inquiringly, “This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s, my father’s?” “Certainly, Miss,” replied the man, “but you were not expected until to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>A pretty waiting-maid now advanced from the end of the hall, to offer her services to her new mistress, and at the same moment, the tall, stiff lady who had been leaning over the bannisters to listen, began slowly and cautiously to descend the stairs. Mabel looked up, and to her astonishment, perceived her aunt, Miss Sabiah Vaughan, the last person in the world whom she had expected to see. Rejoiced, however, at recognising a familiar face, she sprung to meet her, embracing her with more than her usual warm-heartedness, and exclaiming as she did so⁠—“Aunt Sabiah! How glad I am to see you!”</p>
			<p>Miss Vaughan partially returned the salutation, although awkwardly, and with evident effort, for she was unaccustomed to such hearty demonstrations of feeling, and putting up her hands, she began nervously to smooth down her collar, which Mabel, in her joy, had slightly disarranged. But although her manner was thus constrained, her face betrayed symptoms of satisfaction which were easily detected by Mabel, who was accustomed to every variation of which her aunt’s features were capable. Her nervous agitation, too, Mabel knew to be only the effect of pleasurable excitement, and holding her affectionately by the hand, the young girl accompanied her up stairs, the pretty waiting-maid preceding them, and throwing open the doors of the chamber and dressing-room which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan intended for his daughter’s use.</p>
			<p>“But where are all the rest? where is Harry?” inquired Mabel eagerly, when she had drawn her aunt into the room, and with some difficulty persuaded her to be seated.</p>
			<p>“Why you were not expected until to-morrow, child,” replied Miss Vaughan, “and Harry has gone up the river with a party of young fellows, and will not be back until late.”</p>
			<p>“He is come then? he is safe and well?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed; and altered so I hardly knew him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, how I long to see him!” exclaimed Mabel; and then followed questions and replies concerning the different members of the family. There was no one at home, however, nor any prospect of an arrival until <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan should return, at six, the usual dinner hour. So, with some difficulty composing her excited feelings, Mabel resolved to occupy the intervening time in making those changes in her dress which the dust and smoke of travelling had rendered necessary, stipulating that her aunt should remain where she was, and gratify her curiosity on many points, concerning which she was far from being satisfied.</p>
			<p>She could not conceal her astonishment at finding Miss Vaughan apparently domesticated in her father’s house, no mention having been made of her in his recent letter. It seemed that Miss Sabiah had reached New York, only the previous day, and had spent the entire morning, unpacking her trunks in an upper chamber, which, being in the most retired part of the house, she had chosen for herself in preference to the room which had first been allotted to her. Since the death of the old lady Vaughan, which took place about a year previous, Sabiah had boarded in her native village, and had now come by special invitation from her brother to pass the winter in his family. She appeared deeply hurt on learning Mabel’s utter ignorance of the plan, having supposed that it would be communicated to her niece as a fact of some importance. The poor lady had experienced her share of neglect in this world, but was none the less sensitive on that account. She looked discontented, too, and ill at ease, and so far from contributing to the cheerfulness of the house, and giving it a home-like aspect, her presence seemed to reflect a far more sombre shadow upon the room than those which were cast by the now gradually deepening twilight. Mabel’s quick eye and ready sympathies, saw and understood her aunt’s state of mind at a glance; but, although disappointed herself at her father’s and brother’s absence, and the chilly nature of her reception, her buoyant nature was far from indulging useless regrets, or dismal forebodings. Her spirits, on the contrary, rose with the necessity of exerting herself to please and cheer one whom she was really delighted to find an inmate of the household, and she hastened to complete her toilet, and divert her aunt’s thoughts by a proposition that she should accompany her on a tour through the house, which the young girl was eager to inspect. All was new to Mabel. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s residence had recently been subjected to a thorough course of repair and enlargement. Old rooms had been converted into others of far different size and construction, and even the well-remembered nursery, to which Mabel had fancied that instinct would guide her at once, had given place to an octagon apartment, lit from the ceiling, and evidently intended for a picture cabinet. Miss Sabiah, who was even more unaccustomed than Mabel to the display of luxury and elegance which met them at every turn, and who was overawed and oppressed by the magnificence of her brother’s house and furniture, felt a sense of relief as she observed the easy and careless step with which her niece trod the velvet carpets, and the confident and unconcerned air with which, as they passed through different rooms, she threw open the blinds, raised the curtains, and altered the position of light articles of furniture and adornment. Darkness, silence, and gloom, seemed to flee before her, and the shadow upon Miss Sabiah’s feelings being proportionately dispelled, she at length gave vent to her sentiments in the sudden exclamation⁠—“Well Mabel, I am glad you have come to make some of these improvements. Everything is beautiful, to be sure, but it has looked very dull to me, and I believe my brother finds it so too, for he lives entirely in the library, below stairs, and he told me yesterday, that he had not sat in the drawing-room since it was furnished. As for Harry, he has scarcely been at home since I came. Your father asked him at breakfast how he liked the house. I was shocked at the answer he made, and yet I could not wonder much.”</p>
			<p>“What did he say?” questioned Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Why, that it seemed to him pretty much like any other old tomb; and your father laughed and said ‘Oh, well, when Mabel comes she will manage to brighten it up a little.’ ”</p>
			<p>And <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan prophesied truly. Already had his daughter’s fresh young spirit begun to exert its magic influence. Already had the rooms assumed the air of cheerfulness, which youth and taste know so well how to impart. Already had the halls and parlors resounded more than once with her free and joyous peals of laughter. And, stranger still, Miss Sabiah’s rigid and indifferent expression had begun to soften into an occasional smile, while her dull eye had caught something of the animation which danced and sparkled in that of her niece. Even the servants, as they heard her merry voice while she passed from room to room, seemed to catch the inspiration of her presence. The neat waiting-maid might be seen tripping through the chambers with a freer step and a lighter heart, and even the grave footman, as he took the plate from the sideboard and spread the table for dinner, found himself humming a tune which he had not heard since he was a boy.</p>
			<p>Truly there is no sunshine so refreshing as that which beams from a happy youthful heart.</p>
			<p>“Now for your favorite song, aunt Sabiah,” exclaimed Mabel, as she threw open the grand piano-forte and seated herself before it. “No one praises my singing as you do,” and the young girl commenced playing a simple air which she had found, many years before, in an old music-book at her grandmother’s, and often sung, to the accompaniment of a cracked and worn-out instrument, for her aunt’s especial benefit. To sing was as natural to Mabel as to laugh, nor was it any wonderful proof of thoughtful love that she should select the song which would be sure to please her listener best. The appeal to Miss Sabiah’s feelings, however, was irresistible; and, as a moment before, her niece’s playful sallies had called a smile to her sunken cheek, so now, at this simple proof of loving remembrance, a solitary tear started to her eye and was wiped away unseen. What wonder-working power there must have been in the girl, who could thus summon both smiles and tears from out the withered and wasted heart which had long seemed callous to any strong emotion!</p>
			<p>Mabel, however, quite unconscious of the effect of her music, had sung but a few lines, when she started from her seat, exclaiming, “I hear my father’s voice,” and in an instant more she had bounded down the stair-case to meet him. He was not in the hall, but the familiar tones proceeded from the library, the door of which stood open. An eager word of greeting escaped Mabel’s lips at the threshold of the room, but her step was suddenly arrested by the presence of a stranger, who stood near the door, while her father, with his back towards her, was engaged in unlocking a secretary at the opposite end of the library. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan turned, however,at the sound of her voice, and throwing on the table a large roll of papers which he had just taken from the shelf of his cabinet, he came towards her with an air of surprise, lifting his spectacles from his nose as if to make sure that the glasses were not deceiving him, and exclaiming, as he stretched out a welcoming hand, “Mabel? my daughter? is it possible? Why, where did you come from?”</p>
			<p>Mabel answered only by a glad smile; for, before she could proceed to make any explanation of her unlooked-for arrival, she caught the sudden glance of embarrassment which (the first surprise being past) overspread the countenance of her reserved parent, at the consciousness of the stranger’s presence. Mabel, too, shared this sensation of awkwardness, for her father did not introduce the individual, who appeared to be a business-agent, as he had by this time unfolded the papers and spread upon the table a number of maps and charts, which he was diligently studying.</p>
			<p>“You are busy,” said Mabel, in an undertone. “I will go back to my aunt.”</p>
			<p>Her father hesitated, glanced toward his visitor, but still retained her hand in his.</p>
			<p>At the same moment, the stranger, who was handling the charts in a hurried manner, and seemed to be in haste, made an abrupt inquiry as to the extent and value of certain landed property, and as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan turned to reply, Mabel slipped quietly out of the room.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah had but just determined to follow her niece down stairs when she met her returning.</p>
			<p>“Father is busy now,” said Mabel, in explanation, “let us go back and finish the song.”</p>
			<p>The song was finished, and several others had been successively sung, when Mabel, who had paused between each to listen for the stranger’s departure, at length announced that he had gone, and now at her persuasion her aunt accompanied her to the library. She was once more, however, doomed to disappointment, and to the mortification of feeling herself an intruder. The papers were still spread on the table, and on entering, Mabel thought her ears must have deceived her, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan was still attentively engaged in examining them, with the aid of another person, whose head was bent down so as to conceal his face, and whom, at a first glance, Mabel concluded to be the man whom she had heard a few moments before bidding her father good-night.</p>
			<p>It proved, however, to be her brother-in-law, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, who had come in unheard, and who rose on her entrance and greeted her cordially, although with an absent air; so abstracted was he that he did not observe Miss Sabiah, until <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had twice introduced her as his sister, and even then he failed to notice the icy stiffness with which she returned his forced and indifferent bow. His manner was restless and uneasy, and after a few words of inquiry as to Mabel’s health and journey, he was evidently anxious to resume the subject in which he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan appeared to be mutually interested.</p>
			<p>The latter interfered, however, greatly to the relief of Mabel, who was beginning to look with an almost jealous eye upon these important charts, which seemed so many barriers between herself and her father, so many rival claims to his notice and interest. “Not now, Leroy,” said he, in a decided tone, thrusting the papers aside and removing his spectacles. “Mabel has but just come,⁠—I have scarcely seen her. I shall be at leisure to-morrow, and we can then come to a decision; but about those eastern stocks⁠—” and then followed a few hasty words in a low tone, to which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy assented by a quick but earnest nodding of the head, after which he immediately took his hat to depart. Mabel asked after her sister. “I think it probable she is under the hair-dresser’s hands,” was the reply. “I believe she is going to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">D.</abbr>’s ball to-night.” Mabel expressed a hope that she would come to see her the next day, if not too much fatigued, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, having declined an invitation to dinner, took his leave.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan gathered up the scattered papers, placed them in the secretary, closed and locked the door, and, as he put the key in his pocket, his face assumed a relieved and satisfied expression, which seemed to say that for the present he had done with business and was free to enjoy the society of his sister and child. He was not naturally a talkative man, and Mabel had never been in his company without experiencing a consciousness of his inability to maintain an animated conversation. He was one of that large class of individuals whose characters unbend most fully under their own roof, and who never appear to such advantage as in the privacy of their domestic circle. He had also many inquiries to make concerning Mabel’s journey, her travelling companions, and the hour of her arrival, and, as he drew a chair to the fire, bestowing upon her at the same time a pleased and affectionate glance, she felt emboldened to address him with something of the ease and familiarity of a privileged child. She also by degrees beguiled her aunt into the conversation which was fast assuming a lively tone, and before long, the little group so suddenly brought together, presented the air of a home-circle engaged in familiar fireside intercourse.</p>
			<p>There was no mistaking the proud satisfaction with which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan presided at his dinner-table that day, realizing at once the comforts, the freedom, and the retirement of home, from which he had so long been debarred, and which his increasing age now rendered more than ever desirable. The quiet dignity and precision which were his striking characteristics could not wholly hide the pleasurable emotions with which he once more felt himself a family man. Beneath the veil of strict courtesy towards Miss Sabiah might be detected no small degree of brotherly kindness, and although his voice dwelt with evident pleasure upon the words “my daughter,” his mild eye, as it turned upon Mabel, bespoke a deeper well-spring of fatherly love than any words which his lips knew how to utter.</p>
			<p>Nor was the gleam of pleasure any less evident which overspread Miss Sabiah’s features when Mabel insisted upon her occupying the seat of honor opposite her father, which the elder lady with an awkward show of humility was disposed to resign, but which Mabel disclaimed the possibility of filling, assuring her aunt that she alone was entitled to preside there. Whatever might have been <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s preference in the matter he was too well-bred to interfere, and the deference with which Mabel thus yielded to her aunt’s superior claims gratified her sensitive and watchful pride, and was a soothing balm to feelings which had been roughly chafed by her past experience.</p>
			<p>Harry’s absence was the only drawback to the happiness of the party. “Do not sit up for him Mabel,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, as, dinner concluded, he prepared to leave the house. “Nor for me either,” continued he; “I have an appointment at nine o’clock, and shall not be in until late. You must be fatigued with your journey, and you will find enough to do to-morrow. Louise will want to take you on a grand shopping expedition, and Harry, I have no doubt, has his head full of plans.”</p>
			<p>Once more left to themselves, Mabel and Miss Sabiah returned to the cheerful and well-lit library; and soon the former, taking a low seat near her aunt, begged to hear some account of her solitary journey to town, the particulars of which she had not yet learned.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah, pleased and gratified at having so ready an audience to several little misadventures of the previous day, proceeded to relate them at length, and found in Mabel an attentive listener.</p>
			<p>In less time than Miss Sabiah occupied in narrating her travels we will take a glance at the history of her life.</p>
			<p>The life of an old maid! A desert, a blank, an unwritten page to the careless, the thoughtless, the unobservant mind. But to the initiated eye which faithfully scans its past, its present, and its future experience, may it not prove a world of strong affections, conflicting duties, anxious cares, and busy memories, whose only register is hidden in one human heart?</p>
			<p>Sabiah Vaughan was the youngest of three children, having besides her brother a sister who was a few years her senior. Their father was a man of good standing in his own town, a respectable country trader, and, during the latter years of his life, president of the village bank. Their mother was a notable housewife, somewhat imperious in her temper and ambitious in her views. This ambition centred principally upon her children’s success in life, and was proportionately gratified when her son became a successful merchant, and her eldest daughter married a man of property and went to reside in a neighboring town. Sabiah was still young and could afford to wait awhile; or, as her mother used occasionally to say to her neighbors, “Now that John is doing so well, and Margaret is settled so much to my mind, I feel quite easy about my family. I am not particular about Sabiah’s marrying at all, or, if she does, there is plenty of time yet for her to look about and make as good a match as her sister has done.”</p>
			<p>But, unfortunately, a barrier had already arisen to Sabiah’s ever making what her mother considered a good match. During those years when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan’s mind had been chiefly occupied with the welfare of her other children, Sabiah’s affections had become fixed upon one whose poverty was his only unworthiness. But he was a good scholar, and although his father was a farmer in narrow circumstances, the son aspired to one day studying for the ministry; and in looking forward to becoming a clergyman’s wife, Sabiah never dreamed of insulting the dignity of her family. So, when the simple-hearted girl made a confidant of her mother, she was as much astonished as grieved at the torrent of reproach which her communication called forth. She was reminded of her brother’s wealth, her sister’s high position, and asked if she were willing to bring disgrace upon her father’s house by connecting herself with beggars. She was reluctantly compelled to admit that it would be years before her lover and herself could reasonably hope to marry, and was at length commanded by both her parents to break at once an engagement to which they would never give their consent.</p>
			<p>Sabiah was a gentle-spirited girl. She had been taught from her childhood to yield strict obedience to parental government. She dared not listen to those secret whisperings which termed it, in this instance, parental tyranny, and after a few months of what was, by the united voice of the family, termed obstinate persistence in folly, she at length reluctantly consented to abide by their decision.</p>
			<p>That her heart, however, was not unfaithful, the sorrow of years bore witness.</p>
			<p>Her lover left their village soon after his mortifying dismission, studied for the ministry, and eventually married another. Sabiah remained in her father’s house, patiently fulfilling a daughter’s duties and struggling with a life-long regret.</p>
			<p>Nor did the filial obedience and filial respect which had prompted this greatest of sacrifices, diminish or falter during many years of severe privation and trial. So long as her father lived, her devotion to him was most exemplary; a devotion which was painfully tested during the months of distressing illness which preceded his death, when Sabiah’s face grew pale, and her figure wasted with constant care and watching.</p>
			<p>His affairs in the meantime suffered some disorder, and at his death the widow and her daughter were quite cut off from their usual means of subsistence, their only property consisting in the house and a few acres of unproductive land. “They will be very well off, however,” said the neighbors. “John will settle something upon his mother, and Margaret is rich.” And when, in the course of years, Sabiah’s health became feeble and her hair turned gray, and the village gossips remarked that her temper was getting sadly soured, they said one to another, “Now what can Sabiah Vaughan have to vex or wear upon her, with such a comfortable home and such a quiet life as she leads? If she had a husband that was hard to please, and children that were sick and fretful, and a great dairy like mine to attend to, I could conceive of her being irritable now and then, and looking old and careworn, but really there is no excuse for her with nothing in the world to trouble her.”</p>
			<p>Was it nothing, then, that for ten long years Sabiah’s monotonous existence had been varied only by the petty and vexatious cares and economies which dependence and a narrow income entail? Was it nothing, that during all that time she had experienced constant trials of spirit in consequence of her mother’s arbitrary temper, which, since her husband’s death, was deprived of its only check? Was it nothing, that all her dutiful efforts and habitual sacrifices called forth no praise, while for every omission or neglect she was reproved as if she had still been a child? Was it nothing that, while the ostentatious gifts of her wealthy brother and purse-proud sister called forth grateful acknowledgements quite disproportioned to their value, her life-long services were received with coldness and indifference, and that while the wealth and position of these more favored relatives were a constant theme for the old lady’s self-congratulation the prospects of Sabiah were seldom referred to saving for the sake of contrast?</p>
			<p>If with simple faith and childish trust the solitary heart could have found repose in Him who suffereth not these things in vain, such outward trials might not have had power to mar her inward peace; but as, while she yielded submission to her earthly parents, she had been debarred from that great solace and sweetener of existence which is found in human love, so, while she made no outward rebellion to the lot apportioned to her by a Heavenly Father, she failed to recognize in it the hand of love divine.</p>
			<p>Was it strange, then, that her heart grew cold? Or who can wonder that, with affections chilled, and sympathies blunted, she became at last irritable, distrustful, and reserved? She had drank from a bitter cup, and the gall had penetrated into her heart.</p>
			<p>That heart was not wholly callous, however. Its sensibilities were not wholly destroyed. There was one little oasis in the desert, one little spring of life and hope amid the wilderness. It was the only one, but its source lay deep, and its power might be made sufficient to fertilize the whole; for there was one being in the world in whose welfare Sabiah still felt a tender and affectionate interest. And that was Mabel.</p>
			<p>Strangely enough, this affection for her brother’s child was closely associated with that deep parental respect and reverence which formed so strong a trait in Sabiah’s character, and which years of injustice had not power to efface. For it was the fact that the child was named for her grandmother Vaughan, which first gave her a claim to Sabiah’s love. It seemed to ally her more closely to their side of the house, and distinguish her from her mother’s fashionable connections, for whom Sabiah felt a mingled awe and dislike. Moreover, the circumstances of her childhood and school life kept her entirely aloof from family ties and prejudices, thus giving to her maiden aunt a tolerable chance to win some share of the little girl’s affections.</p>
			<p>Nor was this strong predisposition in Mabel’s favor in any degree lessened during those periodical visits to her grandmother, to which we have already alluded. She was then thrown wholly upon the care of her aunt, and was in a great degree dependent upon her companionship, especially during those later years in which Harry had ceased to accompany his sister. And Sabiah welcomed the care, which was her only labor of love throughout the year, and rejoiced in the companionship which cheered and enlivened her otherwise dull and monotonous life, while with every succeeding summer her heart became more and more closely linked to the child.</p>
			<p>Nor did Mabel fail to appreciate this kindness, and reciprocate this love. It was true she often wearied of her visits, and was impatient to return to her schoolmates, for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan’s house furnished but little diversion for youth. But Sabiah, nevertheless, had the satisfaction of seeing that she had found a place in the heart of her niece; and this happy conviction was confirmed by the fact, that as Mabel grew into womanhood, she seemed to find not only contentment, but pleasure in her society, and gave still further evidence of her gratitude and affection by many a word, letter, and token of remembrance. How those words sank into Sabiah’s heart, how those letters were read and re-read, and with what fondness those gifts were treasured up, Mabel little knew. As little did she guess that a deep love for herself was the one green spot in a withered heart; that it rested with her to let that heart remain a wilderness, or bid it blossom like the rose.</p>
			<p>How lightly the responsibility rests upon her now; and yet she is unconsciously fulfilling it in part, while she sits with upturned and attentive face, lending a ready ear to a story of misadventure and alarm, her beautiful and expressive features, as seen in the flickering fire-light, proclaiming her warm-hearted sympathy in the tale.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
