<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>So forth she sallied, blithe and gay,</span>
						<span>And met dame Fashion by the way;</span>
						<span>And many a kind and friendly greeting</span>
						<span class="i2">Passed on their meeting:</span>
						<span>Nor let the fact your wonder more,</span>
						<span>Fashion and she are hand and glove.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barbauld.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s home was on the second floor of a fashionable hotel. The cares of housekeeping were so irksome to Louise, and so ill-fulfilled, that her husband at length acceded to her often-repeated entreaty that she might be promoted to the independence and luxury of hotel-life; and she had now been for two successive winters the occupant of an elegant suite of rooms, in close proximity to the apartments of her friend, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, whose example had stimulated the fickle Louise, and encouraged her inherent love of change.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy, who at first opposed this arrangement, had now become its warmest advocate; for, while his natural indolence had prevented his exercising any efficient check upon his wife’s domestic mismanagement, he had been the chief sufferer from the anarchy and confusion which pervaded his establishment; and he found under the present system, if not an increase of actual happiness, a release from many petty annoyances, and a marked lessening of his yearly expenditure. And whatever accustomed comforts his new home failed to supply, were amply compensated for at his club, of which he was a constant frequenter.</p>
			<p>Louise found here, as she had elsewhere, continual sources of discontent, and was often restless and dissatisfied; especially did she murmur at the peculiar misfortune and hardship which restricted her in her present mode of life from many social privileges to which she had been accustomed in her own house, and it was, therefore, with proportionate joy that she received the first intimation of her father’s intentions and plans.</p>
			<p>The reception of guests under his roof would be less onerous and far more agreeable than furnishing entertainments of her own. Mabel, being but a school-girl, must be properly introduced into society, and who could be so capable as herself of superintending the festivities attendant upon her entrance into city life? What, indeed, was to prevent the rooms of her wealthy parent from becoming the scene of all those fashionable and social gatherings, over which Louise felt herself well fitted to preside?</p>
			<p>Certainly not any opposition on her father’s part,⁠—for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, while he dreaded to see Mabel become a mere fine lady, or Harry an idle fop, was, nevertheless, too easy-tempered and yielding to oppose any schemes which would tend to his children’s gratification and happiness, and, in matters of expense, it was neither his nature nor habit to place restrictions upon the extravagance of his family,⁠—certainly not any want of energy on the part of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, whose capacities were never so thoroughly called out as on an occasion like the present, when she was actuated by the three-fold motive of establishing her young relative in the gay world, promoting her own enjoyment, and strengthening her influence in her father’s house.</p>
			<p>Nor was she destined to disappointment. It was the universal voice among the leaders of fashion, that nothing could be in better taste than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s house and equipage, nothing more successful than the grand reception, held in honor of Mabel and gracefully conducted by Louise, nothing more certain than the fact, that the former would rank as the unrivalled belle of the season, and the latter continue one of its choicest ornaments.</p>
			<p>Thus, borne on the tide of happy fortunes, and launched into gay life under the most flattering auspices, our young school-girl achieved, almost without conscious effort, the position to which nature and circumstances seemed to destine her.</p>
			<p>“Let me see!” exclaimed Harry one morning, looking up from a daily journal and glancing mischievously at Mabel, “it is a week to-day since your arrival in this great city,⁠—yes, just a week,” added he, “and my prediction fulfilled already!”</p>
			<p>“What prediction?” asked Miss Sabiah, lifting her eyes from an intricate piece of knitting work and fixing them somewhat anxiously upon Harry, who, lounging over a late breakfast, was, at the same time, carelessly scanning the morning paper.</p>
			<p>“A piece of shrewd foresight on my part, aunt, which informed me, that seven days and seven nights only would be required for the transformation of a chrysalis into a butterfly.”</p>
			<p>Aunt Sabiah, to whom Harry’s vague and ironical replies were often unintelligible, moved no further inquiry, but looked down at her work, with the vexed and injured expression of one who has failed to obtain a satisfactory answer.</p>
			<p>Mabel, who better understood the allusion, continued to occupy herself with feeding Harry’s great dog, holding high above the head of her huge playfellow the dainty bits she had taken from the table, and obstinately refusing to meet the eye of her brother, which she knew to be fixed upon her.</p>
			<p>“Two wedding receptions, and an evening concert, on Tuesday,” reckoned Harry, counting with his fingers; “fashionable promenade, opera, and ball, on Wednesday.”</p>
			<p>“Let me disentangle that worsted for you, aunt,” exclaimed Mabel, still feigning inattention, and taking a low seat near Miss Vaughan.</p>
			<p>“Three magnificent parties on Thursday,” continued Harry, “and the grand ball of the season on Friday! Well done, Mabel! well done! I said one week would make a fine lady of you; what a pity I didn’t take a bet on it.”</p>
			<p>“I deny the charge,” said Mabel, warmly, “it isn’t true, is it, Tartar?” and she patted the head of the dog; “fine ladies don’t play with great dogs, nor understand the mysteries of knitting work either,” and, as she spoke, she drew the needles from the entangled worsted, unravelled a piece of the work, and began patiently to take up the stitches.</p>
			<p>“Ah! but I have the proof,” said Harry triumphantly, rising from the table; “here we have it in black and white, and what the newspaper says must be true,” and he laid before her the paragraph in question.</p>
			<p>It was a description of last night’s brilliant ball, and among the noted beauties of the evening, Mabel’s name stood first. As she read the flattering description of her own personal and mental charms, an indignant flush overspread her face. “An impertinent paragraph like that proves nothing!” exclaimed she, with spirit.</p>
			<p>“It merely affixes a seal to the fact,” rejoined Harry, “that our school-girl of a week ago has ripened into the woman of fashion,” and he pointed to the heading of the article, “<span>Our Fashionable World</span>.”</p>
			<p>“Then you meant Mabel,” said Miss Sabiah sharply, “when you talked about the chrysalis and the butterfly. A mighty civil speech, I must say. You may think it a compliment to call her a butterfly now, but I’ve never seen the time yet when she deserved the name of a chrysalis,⁠—an ugly chrysalis. For my part I liked her quite as well last week as this. I expect you will spoil her among you,” muttered she in an under tone.</p>
			<p>“Why, Aunt Sabiah,” said Harry, with animation, and in a voice whose irony was lost upon Miss Sabiah, “you don’t mean so! Do you really pretend to say that you were as fond and as proud of Mabel, when she was fresh from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s, as now that she has the dress, the polish, and the homage of a city? She was a very good girl, and one of the family, and of course, we felt a regard for her. But just think what she is now. The belle of the metropolis, the queen of fashion, with dozens of brainless coxcombs at her beck and call, and hundreds of intimate friends, who live upon her smiles! Think what a transformation, what a victory!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be so absurd, Harry,” interrupted Mabel, amused herself, but dreading lest her aunt should take her brother in earnest, or worse still, be offended at his playful sarcasms; “we butterflies, for you are one no less than myself, will fold our wings for awhile; this promises to be my first rainy day in New York, and we will have a charming sociable time at home, to make amends for a week’s gaiety.”</p>
			<p>“A rainy day!” cried Harry, walking to the window, and looking anxiously at the clouds; “no, I hope not, our Jersey excursion is to come off this afternoon, and fine weather is indispensable; but, Mabel, how does it happen that you are disengaged? where is the arch enemy?”</p>
			<p>“How should I know what you mean, Harry? What strange titles you do bestow on people!”</p>
			<p>“No more than is deserved in this instance. Who is the chief enemy of our domestic peace, the ringleader in all these fashionable plots, despoiling us of your society, and inflicting upon us her own at will? If you can’t guess who I mean, my aunt can. She is no more friendly to the Vannecker influence than I am.”</p>
			<p>“O, Harry,” said Mabel, laughing, “how ungrateful, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker and Victoria both admire you so much.” Harry shrugged his shoulders. “You are safe for to-day,” continued Mabel; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker and Louise are going to make visits, at some distance out of town; happily I am off duty. What a pity you are engaged on that excursion party; we might have commenced studying our German!”</p>
			<p>“Hear her!” exclaimed Harry, with mock gravity, “the devoted and ardent student, only debarred from indulging her intellectual tastes by the unavoidable absence of her tutor!”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, Harry!” replied Mabel, “I assure you I have looked at those books again and again, with longing eyes; but I can’t find a moment’s time for anything but what <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker calls the claims of society.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, hang <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker!” retorted Harry, warmly.</p>
			<p>“And her accomplices too?” questioned Mabel, archly.</p>
			<p>“No, spare the innocent,” said Harry, yawning; “give our soft-headed Louise the privileges of youth, and a chance under another leader; by the way, what a languishing little piece of nonsense⁠—” then, meeting Mabel’s astonished and reproachful glance, he hesitated, laughed, and interrupted himself with, “Oh, she’s our sister, isn’t she? mum’s the word.”</p>
			<p>The quick and emphatic nodding of Miss Sabiah’s head manifested her approval of Harry’s half uttered sentiments, and it was with something like animation that she said, in a partial soliloquy, “So, at last, we are going to have a quiet day!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” responded Mabel. “It will be a fine chance for me to read those old letters of Grandma Vaughan’s, and to pin up the bows for your new cap. We’ll have luncheon up stairs, aunt, and not come down until dinner time.”</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah’s face lighted up with unmistakable satisfaction at this proposition, but became proportionably overshadowed with disappointment when, a moment after, the impulsive Mabel exclaimed to her brother, “Harry, I have a great mind⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well,” replied he, stepping into the hall and returning with his overcoat on his arm, “we know you have a great mind, what does it suggest?”</p>
			<p>“That I should walk down town with you as far as ⸻ Hotel.”</p>
			<p>Harry lifted his eyebrows expressively, saying, “but I thought my lady Finery had driven six miles out of town.”</p>
			<p>“I know it,” said Mabel, “but I want so much to see the children, and they would be at home this morning.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said Harry, “I am going directly by there, and shall be charmed with your company; but it may rain; why not take the carriage?”</p>
			<p>“Louise has our carriage.”</p>
			<p>“Our carriage!” exclaimed he, in a half provoked tone; “there’s a plot for you! what has become of her own?”</p>
			<p>“One of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s horses is lame, and he has sent them both into the country for the winter.”</p>
			<p>Harry whistled expressively, and Mabel, with unfeigned alacrity, declared a preference for walking; she was not at all afraid of the rain⁠—was accustomed to brave all sorts of weather, and did not choose to become a hot-house plant.</p>
			<p>“I hope you’ll be paid for your trouble,” said Miss Sabiah, in a tone of characteristic tartness, “It’ll be one while before I put myself in the way of those children again.”</p>
			<p>“How so, aunt?” questioned Harry, in a tone of lively interest. Harry took a mischievous pleasure in encouraging Sabiah’s occasional outbursts of antipathy and pique.</p>
			<p>Mabel, who was just leaving the room to prepare for her walk, did not hear her aunt’s reply, but on returning, equipped for the excursion, she found Harry convulsed with half suppressed laughter, and was greeted with the exclamation on his part,</p>
			<p>“Ah, Mabel, you are prepared for an encounter with wild beasts, I hope; according to good authority you are going to face a monkey and a bear this morning; both are dangerous, but one is open and frequent in his mischievous attacks, while the other sucks his claws and meditates deeper injury; that is a fair state of the case, as proved by melancholy experience;” and again Harry laughed immoderately.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah’s face wore the half-vexed, half-puzzled expression which was invariably called up by Harry’s raillery, and Mabel, who was always a little apprehensive when he thus ventured to sharpen his wit on the flat surface of her aunt’s obtuseness, hurried him away, playfully remarking, that thus warned she should certainly be on her guard.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah gathered up her work, and, with the customary cloud on her countenance, was proceeding up stairs to the retirement of her own room, when Mabel paused at the hall door to assure her that she should soon return, and while in Broadway would avail herself of the opportunity to purchase a few yards of ribbon which would be required for the cap she proposed to trim.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah looked gratified at Mabel’s thoughtfulness, and the latter good-naturedly waited, while her aunt counted out from an old-fashioned purse the precise sum required for the purchase, and gave the most minute instructions concerning the quantity and quality of the article,⁠—Harry, meantime, impatiently shaking the door-lock with his hand.</p>
			<p>“So you have not seen these wonderful boys yet?” said Harry to Mabel, as they walked down the street.</p>
			<p>Mabel recounted several disappointments she had experienced, with regard to seeing her little nephews, and declared herself quite excited with curiosity and interest concerning them.</p>
			<p>“They must have made a riotous invasion into Aunt Sabiah’s room yesterday,” said Harry, again giving way to merriment, as he recalled Miss Vaughan’s description of the scene. “She’s down on them this morning. She’s too hard upon that little Murray, though; he’s a splendid fellow⁠—the other, to be sure, has rather a hang-dog look.”</p>
			<p>Some passing object here diverted Harry’s attention, and, amid various subjects of conversation and interest, the youthful couple ceased to speak or even think of their young relatives.</p>
			<p>Indeed, Mabel’s girlish spirits were so elated by the keen morning air, and the lively sallies of Harry, that in the pleasure of the walk she half forgot its object, and was fairly taken by surprise when she found herself at the entrance of the hotel, and her companion pausing to bid her good-morning. Exercise had imparted a more than wonted glow to her cheeks, and her face wore its most beaming expression, as, standing for a moment with her hand in Harry’s, she gayly urged him to return home in season to make one of their family circle in the evening. He readily promised to do so, and as she disappeared within the doorway, the affectionate glance which followed her for an instant, bespoke a marked degree of brotherly tenderness and pride.</p>
			<p>“Have you turned astronomer, Vaughan?” asked a well-known voice, close at his side, “you appear to be watching the disappearance of a star of the first magnitude.”</p>
			<p>“Dudley, my dear fellow!” was Harry’s quick and eager exclamation, and in the cordial greeting which followed, the latter paid no heed to his friend’s first inquiry. Having satisfied Harry’s astonishment with regard to his sudden arrival, Dudley again glanced in the direction in which Mabel had disappeared, and asked, with evident interest, “Who is yonder brilliant constellation?”</p>
			<p>“A new arrival, almost a stranger in the city,” answered Harry, with feigned indifference; “you will soon see her, I have no doubt, moving in her orbit.”</p>
			<p>“Not I,” responded Dudley, carelessly; “I start for Washington this afternoon, and there is no knowing when I shall return.”</p>
			<p>Harry felt disappointed, for he was really impatient to introduce his friend to Mabel.</p>
			<p>“I have half an hour to spare,” said Dudley, looking at his watch, “and a hundred things to say to you, Vaughan,” and putting his arm within Harry’s, he accompanied him down Broadway.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
