<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Her love is firme, her care continuall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So oft as he, through his own foolish pride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or weaknes, is to sinful bands made thrall.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Spenser.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“My daughter Margaret takes after me,” was a favorite exclamation of the old lady Vaughan. “She has more shrewdness in her little finger than Sabiah has in her whole body.”</p>
			<p>This was very true; for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr>, now the widow, Ridgway, was preeminent for nearly all the qualities which were conspicuous in her mother, and in which Sabiah was totally deficient. Thus she was proud, ambitious, calculating, and selfish. Money was in her eyes the chief good; and the social standing and distinction which it helped to purchase were among the most precious consequences of its possession. Keen and far-seeing in her observation of men and things, she rarely failed to gain her point, and no one was ever known to win the advantage of her in an argument or a bargain. She prided herself upon being a good manager and upon conducting her household on the most thorough, economical and saving principles. The neighborhood always gave her the credit, also, of managing her husband, a patient, plodding man, who set an exalted estimate upon her capacity, and practically acknowledged her as his better half.</p>
			<p>Hospitality was a virtue to which she had no claim; for, unless prompted by some ulterior motive, she was seldom known to throw open her doors for the entertainment of guests. After the death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ridgway, indeed, her utter solitude might seem sufficient to render her sister’s society desirable; but this was by no means the prominent cause of her extending an invitation to Sabiah. In the first place, her brother John had set her the example, and she would not be outdone by him in patronizing their destitute relative; and secondly, her sagacious mind saw various ways and means by which Sabiah might be made a useful auxiliary in her household. It was pride and policy, therefore, rather than natural affection, which induced her to offer her sister a home.</p>
			<p>Nor was the apparent cordiality with which she begged a visit from her nephew and niece due to any more disinterested motives. Though <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway would never have acknowledged the fact, she did not feel quite satisfied with her social position in L⁠⸺; and as the town of L⁠⸺ was to her the world, the attainment of this desirable position was her highest earthly ambition. It was true, her husband had long been the moneyed man of the place, and so had his father before him. There was scarcely a family of standing in the neighborhood which had not, in some remote generation, or in the person of some one of its members, been brought into close business relations, or even under personal obligations, to the elder or younger Ridgway; and the widow of the latter could boast an acquaintance with every onward and retrograde step of their affairs, every intermarriage they had made, every inch of their pedigree.</p>
			<p>This intimate knowledge <em>of</em> the aristocracy of L⁠⸺, however, had never ripened into that actual intimacy <em>with</em> them which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Margaret Ridgway coveted. The member of Congress for the district had been in the habit of talking freely with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ridgway on the church steps; the handsome daughters of Judge Paradox bowed politely to his widow, when they met her in the street or the shops; and all subscription papers and charity petitions were promptly handed to her door.</p>
			<p>Still there was an easy, every-day intercourse prevailing in this choice circle, which existed quite independently of the loud-spoken, bustling, and not over-refined woman of wealth, who eagerly sought admittance within its pale; and it was with the view of breaking down this nicely-defined line of separation, that she now proposed to add to her own claims those of her nephew and niece.</p>
			<p>Though her sphere of action and observation had been limited, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway understood the world and was not deceived in her calculations. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Vaughan was known by repute in this his native county. New York was not so far distant but that reports of his wealth, standing, and fashionable alliance had reached the ears of those who remembered him in his boyhood, and the busy tongue of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway was not needed to circulate the beauty of his daughter or the accomplishments of his foreign-bred son.</p>
			<p>Thus, when the aunt, presuming upon the attractions of her expected visitors, ventured to stop the carriage of the member of Congress, converse somewhat more familiarly than usual with his wife, and close with “I expect my nephew and niece next week⁠—your young people must call,” a girlish face on the front seat looked very bright and animated, and the lady herself replied without hesitation, “They will do so, certainly; what day did you say you expected them?”</p>
			<p>And when, too, she joined <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Paradox, coming down the church aisle, and remarked somewhat abruptly, “So my nephew is to study law with your husband, I hear!” the stately <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Paradox pressed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway’s hand with rather more warmth than usual, saying, “Yes, a very agreeable addition to our circle,” and thinking, “a capital chance for one of my handsome daughters.”</p>
			<p>Thus the arrival of the judge’s student, and his sister, the New York belle, imparted no little excitement to the place. Mabel’s first appearance with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway at church, was the realization of a long delayed hope, and it was with proportionate disappointment that many an eye looked in vain for her brother, who, in spite of his aunt’s offended looks and protestations, lay stretched on a sofa at home. It was well, perhaps, that he staid away on this occasion, for the presence of Mabel alone proved sufficient to turn the heads of all the young girls in the congregation. Her height, her dress, her complexion, were duly studied, and more than one little piece of vanity spent the whole of the sermon time mentally endeavoring to cut the pattern of a graceful fall of lace, which gave Miss Vaughan’s straw bonnet such a genteel air.</p>
			<p>In the course of the week everybody called, and various festivities, purposely postponed until now, began to be talked of and prepared for. The young strangers, meanwhile, were the universal subjects of notice and conversation. Mabel’s manners, beauty, and becoming attire, furnished no small source of novelty and interest, but the innovations and surprises which Harry introduced, were of a still more startling and original nature in the eyes of the quiet towns people. His English gig was of a style never before seen in L.; his long-tailed gray ponies were not to be surpassed in the country; but these wonders were eclipsed by the arrival of his famous trotting mare, Mad Sallie, which he had ordered to be sent after him, and which, with its fancy blanket and braided tail, was talked of and canvassed for ten miles round.</p>
			<p>Thus the town of L., so far from proving a place of summer retirement and repose, had been suddenly thrown into a ferment, and Mabel and Harry found themselves in the very centre of a whirl and excitement of their own creating.</p>
			<p>“Why need I go down, Aunt Sabiah?” Mabel would say, when morning visitors were announced. “They do not come to see me, and it is so pleasant to be quiet and at leisure in the country.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t call it country, dear,” Sabiah would reply, in a deprecating voice; “she won’t like it,⁠—besides, you must go down. Why, they have called on purpose to see you,⁠—she’ll be dreadfully put out”⁠—she, with Sabiah, always meaning her sister Margaret.</p>
			<p>In a moment more the bustling, flurried, impatient <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway would put her head inside the door, exclaiming, “Make haste, Mabel. O child, I wish you had on your lilac dress! It’s the So and So’s; do hurry down, they’re such pleasant people,⁠—been so attentive to me since <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ridgway died,” and Mabel, dressing her face in the smile which masked a heavy heart, would go down and do her best to give satisfaction.</p>
			<p>As for Harry, he soon found his level in this new sphere. There is a freemasonry among fast young men, and, go where they will, they speedily find their compeers, and are recognized in their turn. Change of scene, and relief from the embarrassments he had woven around himself in New York, for a time checked him in his self-indulgent course, and Mabel began to hope that her never-ceasing care and influence, the restraints of her aunt’s house, and interest in the study of his profession, would prove efficient and salutary safeguards, and finally restore him to himself. It happened unfortunately, however, that a neighboring university had just released its students for a summer vacation, and among the idle young men thus thrown upon the community, Harry found more congenial minds than those which were embalmed on the walls of Judge Paradox’s office. The dashing city blade, whose fast horses were the admiration of the neighborhood, and whose attractive manners and generous habits won him universal popularity, could not resist the temptation to forsake the musty study of the law, and engage in those excursions, drives, sporting and fishing parties, which would have been harmless, but for the loss of time they involved, and the imprudence, folly, and extravagance to which they eventually led.</p>
			<p>Whatever good resolutions he might have formed, whatever efforts at self-control he might have made, it soon became evident that the former had become undermined by temptation, and the latter had proved insufficient to resist it. With aching heart, Mabel saw her short-lived hopes extinguished, and trembled more than ever for the consequences of her brother’s reckless and wild career. She had but two rules for her own conduct regarding him,⁠—there were but two agents which she employed for his salvation, and these were love and prayer. Not by word or look did she censure or blame him. She well knew that judgment belongeth unto God, and can only be rashly assumed by any,⁠—least of all by a sister. But she understood in all its force the right which that sweet relationship implies, and, counselled by her tender affection alone, she patiently strove to be true to its faithful dictates.</p>
			<p>Not less gentle, beneficent, and self-sacrificing, were these loving counsels, from the fact that they had their source in the secret depths of a humble and contrite, as well as deceived, forsaken, and disappointed heart. Though forbearing to reproach her brother, bitterly did Mabel now reproach herself for the many wasted and misspent hours which had robbed her of his society and confidence, and given her in return only blighted hopes, wasted affections, and a grieved and wounded spirit. Shrink from it as she might, disown, as she long did, the cruel thought, the conviction gradually forced itself upon her, that her heart had been perseveringly sought to be lightly discarded, that it had garnered up its treasures in one who prized not the gift, and that the friendship which to her had seemed the crowning circumstance of life, had been to him but a winter’s pastime.</p>
			<p>Had this conjecture still admitted of a doubt, that doubt would have been effectually removed by a letter received from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy about a fortnight after Mabel’s arrival in L.</p>
			<p>It was dated from Trenton, where the party, after spending four weeks in travelling, had agreed to pass a few days before finally separating. After giving a general account of the journey, Louise added, “It has not been so very pleasant after all,⁠—there has been so much disagreement about our route, and as to who were entitled to the best rooms in the hotels. Fan Broadhead seemed to think the world was made for her. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker manœuvered, as she always does, to get the best of everything, and I stood up for my rights now and then, for I had no idea of being trampled on by anybody. Fan and the Colonel quarrel so, it’s perfectly scandalous; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earle has given a great deal of trouble too;⁠—she has been ill ever since we left Niagara; and my boys have plagued me to death,⁠—Cecilia can’t manage them at all. Nobody has seemed to enjoy it much but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley and a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Wolfe, the English widow who was at Fan’s wedding, and joined her and the Colonel on the trip. She is young, and pretty, and sentimental,⁠—talks poetry and so on, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley is perfectly devoted to her. They take moonlight walks, and sit on the rocks and compose sonnets. It is a regular flirtation. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earle calls her <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley’s last. I can’t see what he finds to fancy in her; she makes herself very disagreeable to every body else. I shall go from here to Newport, and advise you to join me there; if you have been at Aunt Ridgway’s a fortnight, you must need change of air and scene. I made her a visit once when I was a little girl, and I never shall forget it. I haven’t heard from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy for a month. I suppose there are letters for me in New York. Tell Harry he had better come to Newport and bring his horses.”</p>
			<p>Mabel had read and re-read this letter some half dozen times; had thought and wept over its contents, and it still lay open on her lap, when her solitude was broken in upon by the entrance of her aunt Sabiah; it was one of her trials now, that she seldom had an hour which she could enjoy without interruption. Sabiah was rarely the intruder, however, it being usually the bustling <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway, who robbed her of all peace and quiet. She tried to look a welcome, therefore, as her aunt came cautiously in, glanced around, and then carefully shut the door behind her.</p>
			<p>“Seems to me I would go to the party to-night, Mabel,” said she in a subdued voice, as if she believed some one were listening at the key-hole, “she’s got her heart so set on it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t ask me to do that, aunt,” replied Mabel, a little impatiently, rising abruptly from her seat, and thrusting her letter into her pocket. “I can’t go,⁠—I do not feel like it,⁠—I’m out of spirits. Every body is at times,” added she, as Sabiah glanced from the letter to her face.</p>
			<p>“Well, I dare say you’ve got a letter from Louise; no wonder it has put you out of sorts⁠—it would me. But, la! you’d feel better to go to the party and see all the young people, and have a good time. <em>She</em> didn’t like what you said yesterday about not going.”</p>
			<p>“It can’t make any difference to her,” said Mabel. “She thinks I enjoy these things, but I do not in the least, Aunt. I can’t bear to see so many people. She does not go to such places herself, and I had rather stay at home with her and you.”</p>
			<p>“Well, but you see, my dear, this isn’t a common occasion. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bloodgood, who gives this party, is wife to the member of Congress from this district. They’re a very fine family⁠—one of the oldest families anywhere round. I used to hear of them and of all their fine doings when I lived at home. <em>She</em> never knew them much before you came, and she counts on your going and making a fine show and all that. ’Twould be a pity to put her out; you don’t know how set she is about a thing, when she has made up her mind to it.” Sabiah spoke rapidly, urging her sister’s cause as if it had been her own, and betraying at the same time her dread of that displeasure of which she had early learned to stand in awe.</p>
			<p>Under ordinary circumstances Mabel would have felt bound to comply with the wishes of either of her aunts, even at some sacrifice to herself; but her present state of mind rendered the thought of appearing among a crowd of strangers harrowing in the extreme; and she endeavored to parry Sabiah’s arguments with the words, “But I should not make a fine show. I couldn’t do any credit to myself or Aunt Margaret either⁠—I do not feel well⁠—I am sad, unhappy, miserable.”</p>
			<p>She spoke the last words almost at random; but Sabiah, putting a very natural interpretation upon them, replied in a half sympathizing, half expostulatory tone, “Well, child, I suppose you are⁠—a part of the time, at least. It’s not strange you should be. No doubt you are worrying about Harry, and thinking he has come here to run the same rig he did in New York. But, la, you can’t help the matter, and it’s no use to think any thing about it. He won’t go to the party, you may depend, so it isn’t worth while to be troubled about that. It is a beautiful ride out to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bloodgood’s place, and a beautiful place when you get there. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Paradox just sent round to invite you to go in her carriage, and you can send back word that you will, and so it will be all settled, and you’ll have a nice time, and Margaret will be suited, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>Sabiah’s enumeration of the happy results of Mabel’s compliance was here interrupted by the loud voice of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway, calling to her on some household matter, and she was compelled to hurry away, Mabel saying to her as she went, “I can not go, Aunt Sabiah; indeed, I can not. I wish you would tell Aunt Margaret so.”</p>
			<p>Quite a new turn was given to the affair, however, when at dinner Harry unexpectedly declared his intention of accepting the invitation.</p>
			<p>“That’s right, Harry!” cried his aunt Margaret, who, having heard him express his contempt for parties of this description, had scarcely expected he would be prevailed upon to attend. “You won’t be the loser by improving your acquaintance with the Bloodgoods, I’ll venture to say; there’s nobody in this part of the country entertains as they do.”</p>
			<p>“It is a pleasant drive out there, at any rate,” said Harry, with a somewhat indifferent air. “Every body seems to be going. I was introduced to young Bloodgood at the Lake House, this morning, where I went fishing, and he’s a right fine fellow. He urged my coming to his father’s this evening, and I told him I would. It seems there’s a young man in town⁠—I’ve forgotten his name⁠—some one that has visited here in college vacations and is very popular in the neighborhood,⁠—this affair is got up on his account. He’s been somewhere at the other end of the world, and is to start again to-morrow;⁠—just here to have a peep at his friends and then be off.”</p>
			<p>“Who can it be?” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway; “Can’t you remember his name, Harry? Did you say he was a relation of the family?”</p>
			<p>But Harry could tell nothing more; and the curiosity and speculative wonder of his aunt being excited to the utmost, she now rehearsed the Bloodgood pedigree in all its branches, enumerating the ages of all the male members, and endeavoring to fix upon the identical individual whom the family were so eager to honor. The fortune and merits of some half dozen having been fully discussed, and each in turn pronounced the undoubted object of so much attention, she at length arrived at the satisfactory conclusion that, if it was not one of these, it must be somebody else⁠—at all events, somebody of wealth, family, and distinction. “There, Miss, think what you will lose!” said she sharply, turning upon Mabel, whose interest she had evidently been striving to awaken all the while.</p>
			<p>Mabel, who, lost in a reverie, had been conscious of nothing beyond Harry’s announcement of his intentions, looked up with an absent air, and when he immediately added, “Why, you mean to go, don’t you, May?” she faltered out, “Yes, if you will take me with you.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, ah!” exclaimed her aunt, in a manner at once taunting and self-gratulatory, “So you can not resist this handsome young stranger. I thought that was all that was wanting⁠—some distinguished guest for whom it was worth while to put on your best smiles.”</p>
			<p>With only a dim conception of her aunt’s meaning, but willing that her change of purpose should be attributed to any thing rather than the real motive, Mabel allowed the remark to pass unchallenged, and even submitted patiently to a succession of similar petty sarcasms, which were coarse rather than ill-natured, for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway was too well satisfied with the triumph she had achieved to be intentionally severe. She little suspected, meanwhile, the far greater triumph Mabel had gained over her own feelings in thus consenting to accompany Harry, for whom she dreaded some less desirable companionship if she should indulge her own wishes by remaining at home.</p>
			<p>“Now wear something handsome,” was the eager and almost imperative remark with which poor Mabel was assailed a few hours later, when, seated alone in her room, with Louise’s letter once more in her hand, she had for the moment forgotten the cruel ordeal in store for her that evening. “Come, let me see your dresses;” and, without ceremony, her pertinacious aunt lifted the lid of a travelling-box which contained the richer articles of her wardrobe, and one after another spread them out for inspection.</p>
			<p>As might have been expected, she at once made choice of the gayest and richest ball-dress among them all, and Mabel could have cried with vexation at the persevering energy with which she insisted upon her niece’s appearing in a costume as ill-suited to the occasion as to her painfully depressed state of mind. A compromise was at length effected, by which an exquisite flounced muslin was substituted for the gay silken fabric; and although the delicate texture of the former, and its choice trimming and embroidery, rendered it unsuitable in Mabel’s eyes for a six miles’ drive, she was thankful to have in some degree overruled her aunt’s bad taste, and to be allowed to indulge the hope that, clothed in spotless white, she should, at least, fail to be conspicuous.</p>
			<p>It was a proud moment for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway when Harry’s little phaeton drove to the door; when her handsome niece came down stairs, attired in the newest fashion⁠—though she did wish she had put on a gayer sash⁠—when Harry appeared with such beautiful little shirt-frills as she had no idea young gentlemen wore now-a-days; when she accompanied them down to the gate, to tuck in Mabel’s dress and spread a shawl across her lap; when Judge Paradox passed by at the moment and bowed; when the neighbors ran to the window to see the young New Yorkers start; and when, finally, the intractable mare, after many vain attempts to get away, dashed furiously down the street,⁠—Sabiah in the meantime standing in the doorway, vexing her poor heart lest Mad Sallie should break Mabel’s neck, and she never forgive herself for having persuaded the dear child to run such an awful risk.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
