<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Their home is home; their chosen lot</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A private place and private name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, if the world’s want calls, they’ll not</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Refuse the indignities of fame.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>The Angel in the House.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The Sabbath which was to terminate Mabel’s visit at Lake Farm dawned clear and beautiful. Since the day succeeding her arrival the weather had been cold and cloudy, and the pleasures of the household had been mostly of an indoor character. Once more, however, that soft, fragrant breath which seems to linger lovingly in the recesses of nature, had asserted its power over the early frosts; and the cloudless sky, the deep blue lake, and the gorgeously-tinted forests were radiant with the last smile of summer. It still wanted a few moments to the breakfast hour, and Mabel, with the bed-room window thrown open, stood enjoying the beauty of the landscape, and refreshing her spirit with the meditations to which it gave rise, when a few soft, long-drawn notes of music fell upon her ear, so harmonious and so perfectly in unison with the scene and the hour, that they might almost be mistaken for the sighing of the breeze through the old hemlock in front of her window. Even when gradually swelling in sound and volume they filled the air with sacred melody, there was something so soothing, so grand, and so inspiring in the strain, that she scarcely cared to question herself concerning its source, but stood enraptured and engrossed, all other senses absorbed in that of hearing. It was evidently the music of an organ, played with no ordinary power and skill; and Mabel, who had observed such an instrument in the library, experienced a dim consciousness that the sound proceeded from its pipes. But although Bessie had assured her that she could play only simple airs upon it, and the tribute of praise which now rang through the house was a difficult and sublime composition of one of the old masters, she forgot the seeming inconsistency, and, until the piece was finished, and the glorious symphony died away into silence, she indulged no thought save the soaring aspirations to which it could not fail to give rise. As the continued and almost oppressive stillness which succeeded at length convinced her, however, that there was to be no repetition of the harmony, she started from her attitude of fixed attention, actuated by the sudden thought, “Could Bessie have deceived both herself and me in respect to her powers, or is she the subject of a sudden inspiration?” And hastily throwing a mantle over her head, she stepped from her low window upon the wide verandah, and proceeded around the front of the house in the direction of the library, mentally ejaculating, “She will be self-convicted, when I detect her with her fingers on the keys!”</p>
			<p>The library, which was also the usual breakfast-room of the family, was situated in one of the wings at the extremity of the building; and it being Mabel’s purpose to surprise her friend by unexpectedly making her appearance at the window, she was tripping lightly round an angle of the verandah, when she suddenly stopped short, and blushed with embarrassment as she encountered, face to face, the true author of the music, the young master of the house, who, having in a characteristic manner given notice of his return home, had sallied forth upon the piazza to enjoy the beauty of the morning.</p>
			<p>Their meeting upon the lonely prairie a few weeks before was scarcely more unexpected to either party; but, as the good sense of Mabel and the active benevolence of Percival had dispelled the awkwardness of that occasion, so, now, the simple candor of the one, and the utter freedom from self-consciousness on the part of the other, quickly restored their mutual equanimity, which had for a moment been disturbed.</p>
			<p>“I was hastening to thank Bessie for my share of enjoyment in that beautiful symphony,” said Mabel, after exchanging a cordial greeting with Percival, who could not, if he would, have disguised his pleasure at meeting her. “If I had not believed you to be nearly a dozen miles away, I should have known, without a doubt, to whom we were indebted for the music.”</p>
			<p>“I did not get released from my duties until a very late hour last evening,” said Percival; “but I then felt an irresistible attraction towards home, which I can not now consider any thing less than a presentiment.</p>
			<p>“Have you been well since I saw you last?” added he, glancing inquiringly at her face, which, the glow of sudden surprise having subsided, certainly presented a marked contrast to the hue of health which it had worn on the day of their prairie excursion.</p>
			<p>“My friends say not,” replied she, smiling, “but I scarcely own it myself, I am so little accustomed to play the part of an invalid.”</p>
			<p>“I fear it is too cold for you on this side of the house,” said Bayard, who observed that the breeze had blown the scarf from her head and left it unprotected; and, with a respectful gallantry most becoming to a man of his commanding presence, he offered his arm, to accompany her to that part of the verandah which was warmed by the morning sun. As she had no longer any object in proceeding to the library, she accepted the proposition and the offered arm, and, Madam Percival not having left her room, and there being as yet no summons to breakfast, they continued to walk slowly up and down for a few minutes, while Bayard inquired with interest concerning the various members of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s family, and expressed his sincere regret at the old gentleman’s illness, which he rightly conjectured to be in no slight degree connected with the evident change in Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Upon my word!” exclaimed the lively Bessie, whom they had already passed once or twice without observing, as she stood in the doorway, but who now interrupted both their progress and their conversation by her raillery, “You seem to be a man of parts, Uncle Bayard; you enter the house like a midnight robber, rouse us out of our beds at daylight with an extravaganza furiosa, and now, lo and behold! I find you prescribing a new regimen to our invalid, whom grandmamma does not allow to take the air before breakfast.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed!” said Bayard, appearing to notice the last clause only in Bessie’s threefold reproof, “Then I should have invited you into the library, where we have a bright fire.”</p>
			<p>“By no means,” said Mabel, smiling, but at the same time withdrawing her hand from his arm and stepping inside the doorway. “No one could suffer from breathing such an atmosphere as this; Bessie is a would-be tyrant, that is all.”</p>
			<p>“She is a little scold,” said Bayard, at the same time sealing with a kiss the lips which were preparing to utter a further torrent of abuse. “I never anticipate any more flattering greeting from her than that I have just received. For whom do you reserve all your fine speeches, Bessie?”</p>
			<p>“For people whom it is no flattery to praise,” said she, breaking away from him, and putting her arm within that of Mabel, in a defiant manner, which seemed to imply that they two constituted a coalition against him; “Miss Vaughan never heard me say anything but good of <em>her</em>.”</p>
			<p>The words might have escaped Bessie accidentally; but Bayard evidently felt them, for he bit his lip and seemed slightly confused by the reminiscence which they awakened, while Mabel lifted her eyes for an instant to his face, and then turning away made some abrupt remark upon the extent of the prospect.</p>
			<p>It was a relief as well as a satisfaction, therefore, to at least two of the party, when, a moment after, a slow, measured, but touchingly tender voice was heard to say, “Good morning, my son!” and, at the same time, a soft and still beautifully formed hand was laid upon the broad white forehead of Percival, who recognizing his mother’s accent and touch, turned quickly, and with a glad countenance, to receive her welcome.</p>
			<p>It was a striking picture which was thus presented by the stately matron, and her tall, manly, Saxon-featured son, whose manner towards her was a beautiful mingling of respect, confidence, and almost boyish affection. Mabel had seen them both in many and varied relations; but never had either more fully commanded her admiration and interest, than at this moment, when the young man stood encircling his mother’s waist with his strong arm, while she looked fondly up into his clear blue eye, in which she seemed to read the fulfilment of all a parent’s hopes.</p>
			<p>“You must have travelled late, Bayard,” said she. “I sat at my bed-room window watching for you until twelve o’clock, which was more than an hour after the rest of the family retired.”</p>
			<p>“I did not leave the city until midnight,” replied Bayard, and it was between two and three when I arrived here; but I am astonished at your expecting me; I sent you no message.”</p>
			<p>“True; but I knew you could not resist having a peep at your garden while this fine weather lasted, to say nothing of the other attractions of home. Besides, as we wish, we are apt to believe; and I felt sure you would be disappointed if you wholly missed the pleasure of our young friend’s visit,” and she laid her hand expressively on Mabel’s shoulder. “You had but a cheerless arrival last night,” continued she, addressing Bayard; “I hope you waked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten, and were made comfortable.”</p>
			<p>“My only endeavor was not to disturb any one,” said Bayard. “The long window in the library was unfastened, and I found matches and candles in my room. I wanted nothing more.”</p>
			<p>“Always thoughtful, my son!” said his mother, with a smile of approval; “come, shall we go to breakfast?” And taking Mabel’s hand in hers, she accompanied her across the hall, making amends for having in the parent half-forgotten the hostess, by the affectionate solicitude with which she now questioned her concerning her health.</p>
			<p>“Uncle Bayard,” whispered Bessie, as she followed with her uncle, “I thought there was a certain style of beauty which you only admired at a safe distance. I am afraid you have had a chill this morning.”</p>
			<p>“Hush, hush, Bessie,” said Bayard; “I humbly crave a truce. Your memory is as provoking as your tongue.”</p>
			<p>As there is nothing which leaves such a void in the family circle as the departure of its head, so there is no transformation so effectual and complete as that which is created by his sudden and unexpected return. Especially is this the case when he comes as Bayard did, in all that joyousness of spirit which marks a true love of home, and brings with him, for its entertainment and benefit, the choicest and best of all the influences and experiences which have attended him in his absence. Thus, every member of the household at Lake Farm, felt a conscious exhilaration of spirits in the mere presence of its young master. Even the servants seemed inspired with fresh energy for the performance of every duty; and the old family cat, who was exclusive in her preferences, deliberately forsook her place on the hearth-rug, and ensconced herself under his chair. Add to this the ready zeal with which he took upon himself every office, both small and great, which affection or hospitality demanded, and no one could be insensible to the fact that a wide sphere of action abroad does not necessarily unfit a man for the amenities of domestic life.</p>
			<p>Towards Mabel, his manner was at once marked by sincere respect and cordial friendliness; nor, although conscious that Bessie was watching him with an eye full of mischief, did he fail in any of those thoughtful attentions which become a gentleman and a host; for, however he might feel annoyed by his niece’s raillery, he was not one to be deterred by self-conscious shyness or awkward embarrassment from that chivalrous devotion to which Mabel was entitled as his mother’s guest, independently of her personal claims as a young and beautiful woman.</p>
			<p>“This is what my mother terms my garden, Miss Vaughan,” said he, as, breakfast being ended, he rose and walked to the window, where, with folded arms, he stood looking out for a few moments on the almost interminable grain-fields which lay stretched before him, with all their golden treasures bursting from the stalk or waving heavily in the breeze.</p>
			<p>“A noble field of labor,” said Mabel, who sat where she too could command the prospect. “I confess I am almost awed by the immensity of the work and its promised rewards.”</p>
			<p>“And yet, my dear,” said Madam Percival, “if you did but realize it, you have been laboring for the last six years in a far wider field, and a richer soil, where, if my son is not mistaken, the fruit is already ripe unto the harvest: I mean the hearts and minds of those two boys of yours,” added she, observing Mabel’s puzzled and inquiring look. “Bayard tells me that he has never seen lads more full of early promise.”</p>
			<p>Mabel colored with mingled modesty and pride at this praise of her own faithfulness and its results; and Bayard, turning round, hastened to confirm his mother’s remark, congratulating her on the hopes which might reasonably be indulged in reference to her nephews, with whom he had evidently been most favorably impressed.</p>
			<p>“Bayard’s animated description of our young friends,” said Madam Percival, “interested and gratified me beyond measure. It is evident, my dear, that the lads still exhibit the same marked individuality of character which distinguished them as children; but that, while the good in each has continued to gain strength, both have overcome the evil tendencies which were so apparent six years ago as to make me tremble for them and for you. As I look back to the day when we sat on the rocks at Niagara, and contemplated the solemn nature of your responsibility, I am disposed to feel no slight triumph in your success.”</p>
			<p>“If you have succeeded in the management of such rude creatures as boys are, Miss Vaughan,” said Bessie, “I think you ought to write out a theory of education, for the benefit of society.”</p>
			<p>“I!” said Mabel, with simplicity, “indeed, I have had no rules, no theory; I sometimes think that the boys have taught me far more than I have them.”</p>
			<p>“Her theory may be laid down in one word,” said Madam Percival, “she has <em>loved</em> her little nephews; love is an inspired teacher, Bessie, and one that may be trusted in every emergency. It has been Miss Vaughan’s counsellor from the beginning. I am quite impatient” said she turning to Mabel, “for the day when you shall introduce these young gentlemen to me once more. But my dear girls,” she continued glancing at her watch, “if we are going to church this morning, it is time we were making our preparations; Bayard, have you given any directions about the horses?”</p>
			<p>Bayard started, apologized for his absent mindedness, for he had been for the last few moments apparently lost in thought, and hastily left the room. His mother proceeded to express her regret at the prospect of so soon parting from Mabel, and at the same time suggested the possibility of obtaining a longer leave of absence from Helen; but Mabel gratefully, though firmly declined prolonging her visit, at the same time expressing the pleasure it had afforded her, and the three ladies then separated until it should be time to leave for church.</p>
			<p>“Does not Miss Vaughan intend to return with us Bessie?” asked Bayard in a low tone as he saw Mabel’s small travelling box brought from her room to be placed in the carriage.</p>
			<p>“No, of course not,” answered Bessie, feigning great astonishment at the inquiry; “she would not have come at all, if I had not taken care to let her know that you were not at home.”</p>
			<p>Though uttered in a mocking tone, this reply effectually disconcerted Bayard; the expostulations which had risen to his lips, at the signs of their guest’s departure, were instantaneously checked; he stood by in constrained silence, while his mother made one more attempt to change Mabel’s resolution, and even assisted in the convenient arranging of her luggage without expressing a syllable of surprise or regret. This conduct was so foreign to his usual hospitality that his mother could not fail to observe it, and Bessie, whose heart was as tender as her tongue was tantalizing felt a pang of self-reproach, as she observed how completely her revengeful shaft had struck home.</p>
			<p>This constraint was but momentary, however, and the drive which succeeded was one of exquisite pleasure to all parties; the softness of the air and the quiet beauty of the scene serving to compose their minds to that calm, religious meditation, which was suited to the occasion and the hour; while for conversation, Madam Percival who occupied the back seat with Mabel, gave her an account of the growth and prospects of the little church, which was situated midway between Bayard’s estate and that of her brother.</p>
			<p>Helen and Harry had arrived in advance, and were on the steps to welcome them and to reclaim Mabel, whom Harry boasted it was no slight generosity in them to have relinquished for so long a period. As the church was situated at the junction of four different roads, in a part of the country where the farms were large and the population scattered, there was but one service during the day, and that proportionately prolonged. The simplicity with which it was conducted, however, the earnestness of the preacher and the attention of the audience, made the occasion both profitable and interesting, and effectually beguiled Mabel of all sense of weariness. Within sight of her, in a neighboring pew, were her humble friends, the Hopes, clothed in their Sunday attire, and decked in the smiles which bespeak cheerfulness and content. Preëminent among them was Jack, now <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Hope, one of the pillars of the church and the township; his tall figure, modified features and shining suit of broadcloth, rendering it difficult to identify him with the shabby urchin of former days. Madam Percival’s pew was a little in the rear of Harry’s, and Mabel, who had followed her brother and Helen into church, while the old lady and Bessie were still lingering in the porch, had for a time lost sight of her friends. Their vicinity was soon made evident, however, when the congregation joined in the opening hymn; for never had the rich voice of Bayard, which had power to enchain select audiences, and make the wild prairie ring with its full, clear song, sounded so melodious in Mabel’s ear, as now, that it was consecrated to a sacred service and led the voices of the multitude in a united chorus of praise.</p>
			<p>The numerous vehicles which surrounded the church during the service, had at its conclusion nearly all driven off, crowded with occupants, while our little group of friends still loitered to bid one another farewell and petition for a future interchange of visits. Mabel’s box had been transferred to Harry’s rockaway, which together with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival’s carriage stood before the door, and the horses being restless, the ladies made haste to exchange their last words.</p>
			<p>“Bessie forewarned me, Miss Vaughan,” said Percival, while handing Mabel down the steps, “that it was hopeless to urge a continuance of your visit to my mother; but as Harry and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan give me the freedom of their house, I hope I may soon have the pleasure of seeing you again, in my character of a friend and neighbor.”</p>
			<p>Mabel frankly replied, that nothing would give her greater pleasure. Harry, who overheard the remark, endorsed it by grasping Bayard’s hand and exclaiming with generous warm-heartedness,⁠—“Let us see you as often as possible my dear fellow⁠—I have no patience with that law term which has engrossed so much of your time of late;” and Helen’s sweet smile was premonitory of future welcomes on the part of one who had none of the jealousy of her husband’s friends which is sometimes attributed to young wives. A moment more and both carriages were off on different roads, which stretched across a plain so level and so uninterrupted that at the distance of nearly two miles Mabel could clearly distinguish a handkerchief which Bessie was waving in her hand as a farewell signal.</p>
			<p>But Mabel had yet to learn what is was to be a friend and neighbor in the sense in which Bayard understood those terms. Though for six years a resident of the West, which is truly a country of gigantic distances, she had never believed it possible that ten miles of space could be so practically annihilated, as was instanced during the few following weeks, when, if Bayard’s and Harry’s estates had been but a stone’s throw apart, they could not have been more strictly pronounced within the limits of good neighborhood. It was not that Bayard’s promised visits were regular or prolonged, or that the attractions of the house were suffered to interfere with the young man’s ordinary occupations. On the contrary, his landed estate had never required more active superintendence than at present; when the harvesting was yet to be completed, and those marks of negligence which had escaped even the careful Owen’s observation were to be rectified, under the discriminating eye of the master; while, in addition to his cares at Lake Farm, the business of his profession in the neighboring city frequently called him thither.</p>
			<p>But, although his agricultural and legal labors were performed with promptness and efficiency, and his mental and physical powers were taxed to a degree which would have exhausted an ordinary man, he still found time and opportunity for that social enjoyment which constituted his highest recreation; deeming a ten miles ride, whatever might have been his previous fatigue, a light penalty to pay for half an hour’s intercourse with congenial minds. It was true, he came and went at such odd, uncertain seasons⁠—astonishing the household equally by his arrival and departure⁠—that such surprises became familiar, and they scarcely realized the number and frequency of his visits; still, as they looked back through the weekly calendar, they could not but be reminded that there was scarcely a day, some portion of which had not been gladdened by his cheerful voice and smile. Whatever might be the object which called him from home, he was sure to take them in his way; and even when summoned to the city, which was in the opposite direction, he more than once contrived to make a circuit which brought him to Harry’s door; thus proving the truth of the old proverb, that “the longest way round is the shortest way home.” If Mabel went out to ride, as she frequently did on Helen’s white pony, still a cherished favorite of its mistress, she was not unlikely to come back attended by their gallant neighbor; and, on one occasion⁠—when she had accompanied Harry into the woods⁠—and been left by him in a shady retreat while he explored a more distant part of the forest, she was unexpectedly joined by Percival, who seated himself on the pine-strewn ground at her feet, caught up the book from which she had been reading, and conversed with her for nearly an hour upon literary themes, with the air of a man never more utterly at leisure to play the agreeable; then mounting his horse, which had been fastened to a tree, rode off to meet a distant appointment, at the almost fearful rate of speed rendered unavoidable by his voluntary delay.</p>
			<p>With Madam Percival and Bessie, Mabel’s intercourse was necessarily much restricted by the intervening distance, which they could not ignore as Bayard did; and except on one or two occasions, when Bessie drove over with her uncle and passed an evening, and once when Mabel accompanied Helen to return Madam Percival’s visit, there was, for a fortnight or more, no personal communication between the ladies of the two households. It was scarcely possible to realize any barrier of separation, however, so long as Bayard continued the medium of their reciprocal friendship; and, although he often made his appearance under circumstances seemingly fortuitous, Mabel could not but consider him as in some sort the representative of her aged friend, and even attributed to her partiality many of those evidences of kindness and attention for which she was in reality indebted to him alone.</p>
			<p>It seemed, indeed, an understanding in the household, that Bayard’s visits, and his evident enjoyment in them, should be a subject of no surprise, and should be attributed to no partial or ulterior motive.</p>
			<p>If Harry observed their frequency and questioned himself in reference to their object, he never betrayed his thoughts, even to his wife, merely remarking with an air of self-congratulation, “It is so gratifying to be able to return some of Percival’s hospitalities, and make him happy in our home!”</p>
			<p>If Helen, through the power of an exquisite tenderness, saw more than met the eye, and suspected far more than she saw⁠—that same tenderness forbade her, by word or look, to ruffle even the surface of Mabel’s feelings; and remembering how, through long years, her own unspoken attachment to Harry had received a sister’s silent sympathy, she reverenced the heart’s sacred secrets, and guarded them as if they had been her own.</p>
			<p>And if Harry and Helen generously refrained from disturbing the quiet current of her thoughts, by so much as an embarrassing suggestion or whispered inuendo, Mabel was still less disposed to interpret in her own favor, those daily visits and civilities, which, however gratifying they might prove, she deemed a valued privilege of the common household.</p>
			<p>The time had been, when vanity and self-love would have lent a more flattering construction to anything so marked as Bayard’s evident partiality for the society which her brother’s house afforded. But the bitter experience of Mabel’s early womanhood, and the chastening influences of succeeding years, had effectually guarded her against the indulgence of vain and delusive imaginations; and it was no part of her present character, to assume for herself any distinction, or claim for herself any especial title to regard.</p>
			<p>Thus, while every circumstance of their daily intercourse served to increase her esteem for Percival, and exhibit his personal and social traits in a new and attractive light, she never even dreamed of establishing any exclusive ascendancy over a heart which seemed to be world-wide in its benevolent sympathies. He might enter with animated and eager interest into her favorite studies and pursuits; but was not this characteristic of him in whatever society he might be thrown? He might omit no opportunity of rendering her a service; but was not his simplicity of manner so tempered with chivalrous gallantry, that he would have done the same for the humblest of her sex? He might express no slight anxiety concerning her health; but could he do less in the case of one who was at once his friend’s sister and his mother’s friend? It must be confessed, too, that although leaving it wholly to Bessie to avenge her cause, Mabel could not quite forget the unfavorable nature of Bayard’s early impressions concerning her. And if now and then she experienced a conscious sense of elation, at some involuntary tribute of praise from the truthful lips which were guiltless of flattery, the emotion was instantly checked by the thought,⁠—“it is but an endeavor to atone for past censure,⁠—a confession wrung from him by a sense of justice.”</p>
			<p>But while Mabel indulged no ideal visions of conquest or of power, and was innocent as a child of any attempt at influence or display, the friendship, which was the natural growth of gratitude and respect, became daily more and more an element of her being; and, in an atmosphere free from every restraint, it was enjoyed without check or hindrance.</p>
			<p>Thus, it was with unaffected pleasure that she greeted Percival, with undisguised regret that she saw him depart; and with confident, though serene anticipation, that she looked forward to his speedy return; deriving calm enjoyment, meantime, in the society of Harry and Helen, entering cordially into all their interests and schemes, and never attempting to analyze the sources of that perfect contentment and repose, both of body and mind, which were gradually restoring her to her wonted health.</p>
			<p>One evening, Harry, who had been to the neighboring city, returned home at so late an hour that Mabel had already retired, and did not see him until the following morning, when they met at breakfast. “I have news for you, May,” said he, as she entered and took her seat at the table. His face was glowing with animation, and Mabel, observing it, eagerly inquired into the nature of the tidings.</p>
			<p>“Nothing less,” replied he, “than the promise of an exciting election. I found every body in the city engrossed with one topic, which was the nomination of a candidate for the vacancy that has lately been created in Congress by the sudden death of our representative. I never witnessed a more exciting scene than prevailed in the convention yesterday; not as usual, on account of party conflicts and politicaldisputes, but because the whole assembly were so enthusiastic in their opinions and their choice. There seemed to be but one heart, one voice, one mind among them, and the unanimous vote was welcomed by an almost deafening round of cheers. I only wished the nominee could have been present to hear the applause which accompanied the proclamation of his name.”</p>
			<p>“I hope he is a worthy subject of their enthusiasm,” said Mabel.</p>
			<p>“You can judge for yourself,” replied Harry. “He is no other than our friend Percival!”</p>
			<p>It would have been difficult to discover, amid the mass-meeting of the day before, a more deeply interested and delighted countenance than that which Mabel turned upon her brother at this unexpected announcement. There was a dancing light in her eye, and a smile of proud satisfaction in her face, which fully expressed her sympathy with the vote of the people; while her astonishment found expression in the words: “Is it possible, Harry? But I had no idea that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival thought of entering political life, or that he had any taste for it.”</p>
			<p>“I believe both his thoughts and his tastes to be wholly averse to it,” said Harry, “and I am by no means sure he will accept the nomination.”</p>
			<p>“That would seem a pity,” remarked Helen, “he would be such an honor to the State.”</p>
			<p>“True,” said Harry; “there is not a man in the commonwealth who could carry anything like his strength and ability into the counsels of the country. But, if he relinquishes his present mode of life to enter upon a political career, I am confident that it will be at a great personal sacrifice. I was one of a delegation who waited upon him last evening, to inform him of his nomination. We found him quietly reading law in his office, and I assure you he looked positively pained when he learned the object for which he was sought. ‘<abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S.</abbr>,’ said he to the gentleman who was the spokesman of our committee, ‘I was never more completely surprised, and, I may almost say, troubled, than I am by your communication. I am very much flattered at being thought worthy to fill this vacancy in Congress, but a political office of any kind is a thing which I have never desired, and certainly have never sought.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘We all know that, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival,’ said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S.</abbr>, ‘and that is the very reason why we and the district at large will be satisfied with nobody else. ‘Give us a man,’ our honest back-country people say, ‘in whom we can have confidence; one who would scorn to buy our votes, and who will never sell his own conscience or the nation’s rights, for any political or party bribe. Give us a man of whom we can say, ‘He will support the weak, and maintain the right, and be just towards all! We are united as to measures, but we are no less so in respectto him who is to maintain them⁠—and we want our man.’ ”</p>
			<p>“I saw that Percival was moved. He passed his hand across that broad, white forehead of his, and then rose and walked up and down his office. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> and some of the other gentlemen continued to urge their point in the same strain; alluded to the critical state of the times, and the anxiety of every thoughtful mind to see the district represented by one who had the confidence of the people, and was so universally popular that he might remain long in the chair of office and be a permanent pillar of the public welfare.</p>
			<p>“Percival listened respectfully and courteously to every thing they had to say; thanked them, and promised that he would inform them of his decision to-day.”</p>
			<p>“And you think his reply will be in the affirmative,” asked Helen, while Mabel wore an earnest, thoughtful expression of countenance, but said nothing.</p>
			<p>“He gave us no encouragement,” said Harry: “and I confess I am at a loss with reference to his probable decision. There can be no question that great issues are at hand in our national counsels, and that, in no generation more than the present, have such men as Percival been needed at the seat of government. At no other time, and in no other way, can his eloquence, wisdom, moderation, and fearless disinterestedness be made so available for his country’s good. Still, when I remember his passionate love for the free life of the West; the enthusiasm with which he has sketched out future improvements; the adventurous spirit with which he undertakes distant explorations; the zest with which he engages in a sportsman’s pursuits; and the independence with which he has ever held himself aloof from the clash of party strife and political conflict: I must acknowledge (and Harry shook his head doubtfully) that it is hard to picture our friend setting out for Washington, to be cooped up for the greater part of the year within the contracted limits of a dull city, and condemned to the toilsome routine and hotly-contested controversies of congressional duty, upon which, if he engages in them at all, he will enter with all the faithfulness and ardor of his nature. I confess that, viewing it in this light, I shall not wonder if he shrinks from the sacrifice;⁠—shall you, my dear?” and he glanced at Helen, inquiringly.</p>
			<p>“I scarcely know,” said Helen, as she at this moment looked up, while a smile overspread her face which was not intended for her husband. “I will not venture an opinion until I have heard him speak for himself.”</p>
			<p>“And you, May?” said Harry, who, not following the direction of Helen’s eye, failed to comprehend her arch and meaning smile,⁠—“you know the whole story, and I see by your face that your mind is made up, whether Percival’s is, by this time or not. Will he stay or go?”</p>
			<p>“If I know him in the least,” said Mabel, with a firm and unhesitating air, “he will go at any sacrifice.”</p>
			<p>At this instant Harry caught the expression of Helen’s face, and turned abruptly round in his chair. Mabel also looked up, and directly behind her, in the doorway, stood Percival, his face flushed with exercise, his riding boots bespattered with mud, his fine hair tossed back from his forehead, which was resting on his hand, as he stood leaning against the door-frame,⁠—and his eyes, now that she had turned her face, fixed full and expressively upon Mabel.</p>
			<p>“My dear friend!” exclaimed Harry, springing from his seat and grasping Bayard’s hand, “you are very welcome! You have come to breakfast, I hope!”</p>
			<p>“No, not to breakfast, Harry,” said Bayard, glancing apologetically at his spattered boots, and slightly resisting Harry’s hospitable endeavor to draw him to a place at the table. “I scarcely know for what I came, since I have only a moment to spare. Advice, sympathy, encouragement, I believe, were what I felt the want of; I have obtained them all, though somewhat clandestinely, I fear, and now I must be on my way again. Harry, have you the address of the gentleman who was the chairman of your committee yesterday? I forgot to take it, and I must write to him when I reach home.⁠—Yes, thank you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan,” continued he, in reply to a proposition from Helen that he should at least take a cup of hot coffee;⁠—“I will with pleasure, if you will let me have it standing.” And while Harry went to look for the address, and Helen ran to a cupboard in the next room for a cup and saucer, he approached Mabel, who, in her confusion, had forgotten to even bid him good-morning, and said, at the same time taking her hand: “I trust you are not displeased, Miss Mabel, at my overhearing your remark; if I had one doubt left in regard to my duty, you have laid it at rest; and believe me, I will endeavor not to disappoint your kind confidence, for which I am the more deeply grateful, that it is far beyond my deserts.</p>
			<p>“I should not have spoken with such decision if I had known by whom I was overheard,” said Mabel, with a smile, which, though embarrassed, denoted anything but displeasure; “still, I am not disposed to retract.”</p>
			<p>“You have no need, in this case,” said Percival, “for I will prove your words true; though since my decision has your approval, the sacrifice will be comparatively light.”</p>
			<p>There was neither occasion nor opportunity for any further remark, for Harry had by this time returned with the address, and Helen, also, brought the coffee, which Percival swallowed hastily, then bade them all farewell, and in a moment more was off on his homeward road.</p>
			<p>“Mabel,” exclaimed Harry, laughing heartily as he sat down to finish his breakfast, “I think the convention should assemble once more, and tender you public thanks for the spur you have given to their future representative. I suppose,” added he, “we have seen the last of our candidate for some four weeks to come; he will be so much occupied in view of the approaching election.” And Harry, for the first time, cast a mischievous glance at his wife, which the dear, kind-hearted Helen pretended not to see, and took care not to return.</p>
			<p>But whether this prophecy of Harry’s was made with playful irony, or in all seriousness, its falsehood was not long in being proved; for while he canvassed the county, and brought home daily reports of Percival’s universal popularity and undoubted triumph, and Mabel indulged prophetic visions of his future eminence and usefulness in a public career, the young man himself, after writing his letter of acceptance, appeared to give himself no further thought in the matter; but, leaving the fortunes of his election in the hands of his constituents, devoted himself with increasing assiduity to those other pleasures and cares, which had their source and centre, not in the field of political agitation, but in the domestic circle of his friends. And, as day after day found him still faithful at his post of allegiance, Harry and Helen were tempted to whisper to one another, under the strictest pledge of secresy, their mutual and growing suspicion, that, though indifferent to public favor, he was the ambitious and self-appointed candidate for higher honors than the people had power to bestow; and that he had almost forgotten his popular election, while bending all his powers to win for himself the pre-eminence in one priceless heart.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
