<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 40</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XL</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>I from the influence of thy looks receive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Access in every virtue, in thy sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of outward strength.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Milton.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>If there is one season more than another, which, in its moving associations, appeals to the American heart, and finds there a sure response, it is that of the annual Thanksgiving. Originally a New England festival, almost the only one established by our pilgrim ancestors, and therefore, perhaps, the more highly honored, it has now become a welcome and hallowed institution in every part of our wide-spread land, where New England’s sons and daughters have found a home. Sacred to family and social ties, gathering the scattered members of the flock into one fold, awakening the liveliest emotions of gratitude, and touching the heart’s secret springs, it is to the young a period of unmingled pleasure and excitement, to those in middle life a time of zealous and disinterested effort to promote the common enjoyment, and to the old, a season of solemn musings, touching memories, and immortal hopes.</p>
			<p>It had been the cherished wish of Harry and Helen, as well as the expectation of the whole family, that this anniversary, now close at hand, should be celebrated at the house of the young couple; and their friends at Lake Farm had been cordially invited to join them there. But when Madam Percival learned that old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, his sister, and grandsons, intended to prolong their visit during the whole of Thanksgiving week, she lost no time in presenting an urgent request, that on the actual day of the festival she might be permitted to welcome their united family circle under her son’s roof.</p>
			<p>“It is the only way, my dear sir,” said she, in a note which Bessie wrote to the elder <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan at her dictation, “in which I can be enabled to participate in the pleasure of the occasion, as a recent attack of rheumatism forbids my travelling at this season; nor would I suggest such an exposure to yourself after your recent severe illness, but I am assured that you do not fear to brave even winter weather, if spared from breathing the evening air; and, as our accommodations are ample, we should insist upon your all spending the night at Lake Farm. It is long since I have been privileged to collect a pleasant circle about me on this most interesting of occasions; but by the memory which you, as well as myself, cannot fail to entertain of many happy Thanksgivings in our New England homes, let me beseech you to make my cause good in your children’s estimation, and gratify both my son and myself by your company on Thursday.”</p>
			<p>Harry and Helen, upon the receipt of this note, were disposed to resist such an invasion of their claims. Sabiah demurred greatly at the thought of accepting an invitation, which was none the less formidable to the timid, retiring woman, from Madam Percival’s being dimly remembered as the sympathizing friend of her girlhood. Mabel seemed a little embarrassed at the idea of this change in the family plans; and the boys’ faces were full of eager expectancy and doubt. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, however, at once put an end to all hesitation, by exclaiming with cheerful gallantry, “We can not possibly refuse, Harry; do not say a word, my dear Helen, the excellent lady must not be disappointed;” and the honored head of the house, having thus promptly expressed himself in Madam Percival’s favor, all acquiesced in his decision, and an affirmative reply was dispatched to the general invitation.</p>
			<p>As if to facilitate the views of all parties, and give added spirit to the events of the day, a light snow fell during the previous night and hardened to a smooth, crisp surface, making admirable sleighing. According to an agreement entered into in anticipation of a snow-storm, Bayard drove over in the morning, in a covered vehicle which had been put on runners the previous winter for his mother’s convenience, and returned with Sabiah, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, and Helen, while Mabel, now restored to her usual health, accompanied Harry and the boys in an open sleigh; and all were borne rapidly over the level prairie, to the cheerful sound of bells. A warm house and a warm reception awaited them on their arrival; dinner succeeded, with its social joys and abundant good cheer; other entertainments, for young and old, presented themselves in due course, and the hours wore pleasantly on.</p>
			<p>It was now twilight of the festive day, and a happy and animated group were assembled in the parlor at Lake Farm, which, partially illumined by the long lines of light that streaked the western sky, and still further cheered by the huge wood fire which shed abroad its fantastic and fitful glare, presented a rare picture of cheerfulness and comfort. In a large arm-chair on the right, sat <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, his hoary hair and attenuated figure still marking him as one who had not been left untouched by time and disease, but his face, glowing with a peaceful and even joyous serenity, which proclaimed that newness of life into which the old man had been born again. Near him might be seen the venerable mistress of the household, with her soft, white hands folded on her lap, the snowy folds of her muslin neckerchief, and the flutings of her widow’s cap, contrasting with her dress of rich black satin, and her whole attire adding, as far as anything foreign to herself could add, to the dignity and grace of her noble person. Sabiah, too, had found her niche in a corner of the opposite sofa, had recovered from the awe with which Madam Percival had at first inspired her, and learning to recognize in her the beloved Miss Bayard of her school-days, had settled herself into a composed attitude, and now formed one of the aged trio, who were watching the more youthful members of the company and participating in their enjoyment.</p>
			<p>They were all in high spirits, having just returned from an expedition to the farm-house of Owen Dowst, where they had been since dinner, according to invitation, to attend the baptism of the little Rose, purposely appointed for this day, that the occasion might be honored by their presence.</p>
			<p>The pleasing incidents attendant on the ceremony, the brisk walk over the frozen and glistening snow, and their animated satisfaction in each other’s society, had given a fine glow to their faces, and loosened their voluble tongues. Helen, always keenly sensitive to cold, and rejoicing in the bright blaze which greeted them on their return, had seated herself on a low footstool between Aunt Sabiah’s corner of the sofa and the wide hearth-stone, and with her hand locked affectionately in that of her old friend, was the very picture of sweet and gentle content. In front of the sofa stood Mabel, her beautiful face lit up with the fire-light, while she entertained her aunt with a spirited account of the afternoon’s proceedings; Alick on one side, assisting her to deliver with faithfulness, a torrent of respectful messages, of which Lydia had made her the bearer; and Murray, leaning over the arm of the sofa, and now and then aiding the interest of the narrative by his graphic and witty allusions.</p>
			<p>And while Sabiah listened attentively, and uttered many an ejaculation of astonishment, at Lydia’s good fortune, Bessie, on her part, was exciting the gratified smiles of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and Madam Percival, as she recounted with that spice of playful exaggeration for which every one knew how to make allowance, the simple honors, which, in connection with the christening, had been paid to Mabel, Bayard, and the boys, quite to the exclusion, as she declared, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harry Vaughan and herself.</p>
			<p>Harry and Percival, in the meantime, were stationed outside the rest of the group, in the recess of a window, the latter divided between his close observance of Mabel’s varying expression and his attempt to explain to Harry the principles of a new reaping machine, just invented by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Hope, and for which the ingenious young man was about to take out a patent.</p>
			<p>At this moment horses hoofs were heard crackling the crisp snow beneath their hoofs, as they came up the avenue; and in an instant more a figure on horseback shot rapidly past the window. It is John, my man, said Harry, with no little earnestness in his voice and manner. I sent him to the city this morning; he has probably just returned.” And thus speaking, he went hastily from the room to meet his messenger, leaving Bayard at liberty to consult his inclinations, and, if he pleased, join the little group collected round the sofa. He did not do so, however, but remained immovable in the recess of the window, while, had the room afforded a stronger light, a slight flush of anticipation and excitement might have been seen to mount to his temples; for although the rest of the company had either failed to observe Harry’s messenger, or were unconscious of the tidings which he brought, Bayard himself was well aware that the next moment would be to him one of political defeat or triumph.</p>
			<p>No one present was ignorant of the fact that the previous day had witnessed the casting of the electoral vote, in which Bayard had so deep an interest. But it had not been thought possible that the result could yet be determined; and although all hearts beat with expectancy, silence had, by common consent, been maintained on the subject, and it had been suffered to interfere as little as possible with the Thanksgiving festivities.</p>
			<p>The committee, of which Harry was a member, had, however, adopted such energetic measures for obtaining the returns, that, in spite of the snow-storm and the obstacle it proved to their efforts, the exact result of the election had been proclaimed in the city less than two hours before, and Harry’s messenger, who was on the spot for the purpose, had been at once dispatched by the chairman, to announce the intelligence to the successful candidate. The eagerness which shone on the man’s face, no less than the abruptness of Harry’s manner and words, had at once betrayed to Bayard the nature of his errand; and, whatever emotions this knowledge excited, they were still in full force, when Harry, who had apparently scarcely had time to receive his despatch from the hand of the man, rushed back into the room, and, waving the document triumphantly above his head, came forward, with all the warm-heartedness of friendship, and grasped Percival by the hand, exclaiming, “Let me be the first to congratulate you, my dear fellow, on this glorious victory!” and then glancing at the official communication before him, he read aloud the statement of Bayard’s election by an overwhelming majority.</p>
			<p>The tide of feeling which had agitated the hearts of the little company, in view of the approaching crisis, and which had swelled to a fuller flood in proportion as it had been forcibly suppressed all day, now burst forth without restraint; and Bayard was at once surrounded by eager, excited faces, and greeted on every side by a chorus of congratulations. Nor, though seemingly less excited than the rest, was he the man to be insensible or indifferent to these evidences of sympathy and affection. The popular demonstrations, the eager acclamations of the tumultuous crowd, could have no power to move him, as did these simple tokens of social friendship and family love; and he responded to each with cordial and unaffected satisfaction, while, as he felt the soft pressure of his mother’s hand, a tear started to his eye, which did no discredit to his manhood.</p>
			<p>But there was one satisfaction, and that the greatest, which was wanting to him in this his hour of triumph; one voice, and that the one most powerful to stir his soul, which alone was silent; one form, which, while all the rest pressed eagerly forward, still lingered in the back ground. Yes, strangely enough, while every one else was emboldened or inspired to some characteristic expression of delight, Mabel, hitherto zealous in her friendly partizanship, seemed to be suddenly struck dumb. Once, indeed, as Bayard’s unsatisfied eye wandered round the little circle, it met hers, fixed full upon him, with an eloquent, answering glance; but her heart drooped as she encountered his earnest gaze, and the next moment the whole face was hidden from him, as she hastily withdrew into the shadow afforded by her brother’s tall figure.</p>
			<p>Both the silence and the quick retreat were involuntary, however; and if this apparent coolness and reserve were painful to Percival⁠—they were no less so to Mabel herself. For a few moments, indeed, she had stood, intently watching the countenance of the young man, as he received the congratulations of the rest, quite forgetful that some similar demonstration might be expected on her own part; nor was it until she encountered his searching glance that the consciousness flashed upon her, that she had as yet given no expression to her sympathy in the universal joy. She would then gladly have repaired the omission; but the very intensity of her emotions checked and forbade their utterance. There was a quick beating of the heart, which she found it impossible to subdue; and her instinctive retreat, beyond the outermost edge of the little circle, was but the natural impulse of a sensitive mind, which shrank from betraying its own unseasonable and vexatious embarrassment.</p>
			<p>Here, secure from observation, she strove to recover her composure; nervously watching a favorable opportunity for addressing the hero of the occasion, and vainly endeavoring to frame her thoughts into suitable words. But while she thus waited and delayed, a new turn was given to affairs, Bayard was suddenly summoned from the room and the opportunity was lost.</p>
			<p>A delegation of citizens had just arrived, having come hither to rejoice over their victory, and shake hands with the popular young representative. The confusion of tongues which had prevailed in the drawing-room was now superseded by the loud shuffling of feet on the verandah, the violent ringing of the door-bell, and the tumultuous and eager voices of the throng, who, met by Bayard at the threshold, eagerly tendered their congratulations and received his acknowledgments in return. The sudden withdrawal of both Harry and Percival, consequent on this arrival, and the sound of laughter and conversation proceeding from the dining-room, on the opposite side of the hall, into which the new comers had been ushered, had the effect of composing the little family circle into a thoughtful, listening attitude; and one after another they resumed their seats, and a comparative quiet reigned throughout the room.</p>
			<p>In a retired corner, a little apart from the rest, Mabel mused with her own thoughts, and gave ear to the occasional dialogues which took place around her, seriously vexed, meanwhile, at her own inability to assume a natural and unconstrained air, and wondering whether, in the general excitement, her own individual deportment had been observed and commented on.</p>
			<p>No observation could be more critical or severe, however, than that which she exercised over herself. “What is the meaning of this, Mabel Vaughan?” was her inward interrogatory. “Who can be more pleased than you with the result of this election? You have scarcely thought of anything else for two or three weeks past; it has been the object and end in which all your hopes have been centred; nowhere has the young candidate found a more zealous champion; from no one could he reasonably anticipate warmer sympathy and congratulations! You certainly are very, very glad of his success! Why not tell him so, then, in those frank, simple terms which are all that the occasion demands, and which would be sure to be understood?”</p>
			<p>Why not? Indeed, she could not answer the question satisfactorily even to herself. She would have given worlds, had they been at her disposal, rather than that Bayard should suffer a defeat. Still, the announcement was so sudden⁠—it involved so much! Perhaps she realized more than others the responsibility that rested upon the young man⁠—the bias that was to be given to his whole future life. Perhaps she took into the account, that it was an event not merely of private, but of national interest. Why, otherwise, should she have experienced that quick beating of the heart which effectually forbade her utterance? Yes, she was glad, very glad, that was a question which did not admit of a doubt. But she could not speak so lightly as the rest did on a matter of such grave concern⁠—she could not so readily subdue the emotions which an event of such serious moment was calculated to excite.</p>
			<p>The voice of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan was now heard amid the general silence, gravely remarking to Madam Percival: “These political constituents have snatched our young friend from us at an interesting crisis; but this little circumstance only illustrates the general truth, that private friendship must yield to the call of public duty; nor must we complain of our personal loss in view of this election, since it introduces your son upon an arena where he is sure to play a worthy part. I congratulate you, Madam, with all my heart, upon the honors which he has achieved to-night.”</p>
			<p>“I have never coveted any higher honor for my son,” said Madam Percival, in reply, “than that which belongs to every man who faithfully does his duty. I thank you most sincerely, my dear sir, for your friendly sympathy. But new responsibilities are a new test of character and ability; and, as a parent, I almost shrink from congratulation until such a time as Bayard shall have proved that this is indeed a true occasion for it.”</p>
			<p>“The past, however, is, to a great degree, prophetic of the future,” replied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan; “and you will not forbid me to wish you joy, that there is in the young man himself such good foundation for a people’s confidence and a parent’s hopes.”</p>
			<p>“I will not deny, sir,” said Madam Percival, with a placid smile, while her eye glistened with a maternal pride which could not be wholly concealed, “that now, as always, I find in this my highest satisfaction; and, to do Bayard justice, I believe that his aims are pure, and his strength of will indomitable. I pray God that he may be found as wise as I know him to be brave and true.”</p>
			<p>“Who can doubt his fitness for every emergency?” thought Mabel, as, while she watched Madam Percival’s face, she felt her own heart swell with a pride none the less deep, and far more ardent than that which now sent a sudden glow to the aged woman’s cheek. “Has he not nobly fulfilled every trust reposed in him as counsellor, brother, son, and friend! The mother may modestly disclaim the laurels which yet await his brow; but what honor is there in the nation’s gift which we may not hope one day to see him wear? How thankful we should be, and how rejoiced we are, that the public have claimed him as their representative, and have destined him to an elevated and conspicuous career.”</p>
			<p>This thankfulness, this joy, however, were not of the same serene and placid character as Madam Percival’s. Perhaps they were none the less generous, none the less sincere, that another, and in some degree, rival emotion, now and then asserted itself, and was only kept down by the vehemence and resolution with which Mabel strove to convince herself that the occasion was one of perfect and unqualified satisfaction. This honorable and public service might imperatively summon its votary from the domestic circle,⁠—it might engross his time, to the exclusion of all minor claims. She did not need her father’s suggestion, to remind her that private pleasures may sometimes clash with public duties; for the thought had flashed upon her in the very moment of Bayard’s victory. But what then! Was there one among his friends so cowardly as to shrink from the sacrifice? Was there one so selfish as willingly to detain him a moment from his post? one so mean as to estimate personal loss against the public gain? Reason proudly answered in the negative; but a pang shot through her heart at the question; a sigh was the only audible answer; and while joy sat on her countenance, her spirits waged an inward war.</p>
			<p>“I have been in the dining-room, where the gentlemen are!” exclaimed Murray, approaching the spot where she sat, and speaking in a tone of exultation. “There are as many as fifteen or twenty, standing round the fire, talking with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival and Uncle Harry. They are all so triumphant and delighted about the election! it’s capital fun to stand by and listen. Come, Al! come in and hear them!” and he hurried his brother away.</p>
			<p>“How gratifying the presence of these friends must be to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival!” thought Mabel, as through the open door, by which the boys left the room, she heard the indistinct murmur of voices, and pictured to herself the animated scene. “How great must be the zeal which prompted them to a ten miles ride on this wintry night! What staunch and true supporters they will be to him in the future! How closely their interests will be allied to his! How mutually confidential will be the relations existing between them! What a pleasant excitement their arrival adds to the other events of the evening!”</p>
			<p>Such were Mabel’s sentiments; the only sentiments, at least, which she acknowledged, or of which she was distinctly conscious. Why then that undefined sadness which crept over her, as she mentally contrasted the partially deserted drawing-room with the well-filled apartment at the other extreme of the house, where Percival gave reception to his political guests? Why that distinct remembrance which darted into her mind, of her aunt Sabiah’s late denunciation of men engaged in public life, and her assertion of its proverbial effect in weakening social sympathies and ties? Why the restless tapping of her little foot on the carpet as she impatiently awaited the departure of the district committee, and the sense of weariness and discontent with which she mentally ejaculated⁠—“How long they stay!”⁠—then secretly glanced at her watch, adding, as she did so, “only eight o’clock! I thought it had been nine.”</p>
			<p>These latter shades of feeling were, however, but an undercurrent, and were outwardly veiled by her usual calm and cheerful demeanor, to which she had been restored almost immediately upon Bayard’s leaving the room; nor, whatever might be the source of her secret uneasiness, could it be attributed to any conscious yearning for the society of the absentees; for when, at length, the gentlemen from the city took their departure, and Bayard and Harry hastened back to the drawing-room, she seemed disconcerted rather than gratified by their presence, and lost no time in ensconcing herself behind the tea-table, in one corner of the apartment. Here, she begged from Madam Percival the privilege of making tea for the company, an office which she performed in silence and with methodical precision; nor did she leave her place of retreat until Percival was seated at the piano in the adjoining library, and nearly all the rest had resorted thither for the enjoyment of some music.</p>
			<p>So closely do national and familiar airs interweave themselves with associations of the past, that on the anniversary of Thanksgiving scarcely any one could fail to express some preference or ask for some favorite tune. Thus Bayard was detained long at his post, and Bessie, whose catalogue of songs was as exhaustless as her good nature, maintained her place beside him, turning over the leaves of the music book and accompanying him with power and spirit, while Harry, as occasion offered, aided them with his deep bass voice. Helen, to whom the day had been fraught with many a tender memory, waited patiently until the rest were satisfied, and then in a tremulous tone begged that Percival would open the organ and play upon it one or two sacred anthems which her father had dearly loved, a request which Bayard with his usual prompt courtesy immediately complied with.</p>
			<p>Mabel meanwhile, still courting seclusion, had entered the room with a noiseless step and seated herself in an ample bay-window at the extremity of the apartment, in which sheltered nook, partially screened by some heavy old-fashoned draperies, she might enjoy the music undisturbed. Her attitude was scarcely that of a gratified listener, however, as she sat gazing fixedly out on the smooth shining surface of snow, and now and then pressing her aching head against the cool glass. Once or twice, indeed, she might have been seen to start, as if the chorus of a joyous glee grated harshly on her feelings; but with these exceptions, she seemed scarcely conscious of the protracted concert save as it afforded her a welcome opportunity of undisturbed thought and repose.</p>
			<p>At length there was a pause in the music and Mabel, although insensible to the ordinary conversation which had been going on around her, distinctly heard Harry remark to his friend,⁠—“we shall miss you sadly, Percival, this winter. I suppose you will be obliged to leave for Washington next month.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell⁠—perhaps not until January,”⁠—replied Bayard in an under tone,⁠—then added emphatically and with compressed lips, “perhaps immediately.”</p>
			<p>The last word only reached Mabel’s attentive ear. It struck cold upon her heart. Involuntarily she repeated it to herself. It seemed to give form and shape to those vague and undefined emotions which she could not comprehend and would fain have crushed. “Immediately!” was the thought which forced itself upon her⁠—“the fiat has gone forth, and he must obey the call without hesitation and without delay. He must turn his back upon the home which he loves and the friends to whom he is so justly dear. They will no longer hear his cheerful voice as he enters the house unexpectedly at dusk, nor listen to his horse’s feet as he retreats in the distance, nor count upon his aid when in difficulty or need, nor enjoy his books, nor have the benefit of his advice. The woods and prairies will moan him in silence; even his horse and dog will miss him; his departure will spread a cloud over the landscape, only to be dispersed by his return.</p>
			<p>“It is true he goes on a noble errand; he will serve the cause of humanity and the best interests of his country; he will give her his time, his efforts, his affections; he will meet with a just reward; he will be honest, beloved and happy; but we⁠—”</p>
			<p>Alas, she could deceive herself no longer. Exultant, proud, and thankful she might endeavor to be in this his hour of triumph; but she could not be blind to the fact, that the shadow which his departure would fling upon all nature was reflected most deeply on her own heart; that others might regret the absence of a friend, but that for her, the sun of her life would be gone down.</p>
			<p>As thus painfully self-engrossed she peered tremblingly into that night of the spirit, which was threatening to overtake her, she failed to observe that the library had become well-nigh deserted of its occupants, who one by one had received their meed of satisfaction from the music and had returned to the drawing-room. The organ still gave forth the soft, long-drawn strains of a beautiful symphony, and the pathetic minor tones, keeping pace with her train of thought, were listened to almost unconsciously. Not until they were suddenly brought to a close, therefore, and a solemn silence succeeded did she become aware that Helen, who, overcome by the music, had been the last to leave the room, had inadvertently closed the door behind her; that the candles attached to the organ were extinguished, and she and the organist were the sole inmates of the quiet library, now lit only by the pale light of the moon, which was streaming through the window at which she sat. Her first impulse was to steal noiselessly away; her next, to wait in her place of partial concealment until Percival, who was closing the organ lid, should have preceded her, but both schemes were rendered equally abortive, for, so far from leaving the room after shutting up the instrumeut, Bayard folded his arms and with a deliberate air walked straight to the window to look out into the night. She started at his approach, and with a fluttered air was hurrying past him in silence, but, though scarcely less disconcerted than herself at his discovery (for he believed her to have spent the entire evening in the drawing-room), he arrested her with the words,⁠—“Do not go,”⁠—at the same time standing aside to let her pass.</p>
			<p>She stopped⁠—checked not so much by his words as by the power of his mild blue eye, which was fixed upon her with a gaze at once penetrating and persuasive.</p>
			<p>“I did not mean to intrude upon you,” said he, as she stood hesitating and irresolute “but since I am here, indulge me for a moment.”</p>
			<p>He would have taken her hand to detain her, but she would not trust it to him, conscious that it trembled; and without appearing to notice the movement on his part, she voluntarily resumed her place in the window.</p>
			<p>“You are the only one of my friends who has not congratulated me to-night,” said he, as he seated himself beside her. “I was half disposed at first to reproach you with indifference, but on second thoughts I thank you rather for sparing me such a mockery.”</p>
			<p>She repeated his last word in a questioning tone, at the same time looking up at him for an explanation of its meaning.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is a strong term,” continued he, with a vehemence of manner unusual to him, “but congratulations from your lips would have seemed to me scarcely less than a mockery to-night. Others might be blind to the truth, and their well-meant words might be both acceptable and sincere, but I would fain flatter myself that you understand me better, that you do me the justice to believe, that the events which outwardly wear a flattering air, have caused me nothing but pain⁠—that no sentence of exile or banishment could be more bitter than this unwelcome summons, which calls me away from everything that is dearest to me on earth.”</p>
			<p>There was a tremulous depth to his voice as he thus spoke, such as Mabel had never heard in it before. It almost startled her. She felt his eye fixed piercingly upon her; but, without daring now to look up and meet it, she faltered out, “Harry said it would cost you a sacrifice.”</p>
			<p>“Harry! What does he know of it? What does any one know?” exclaimed Bayard, with an impetuous, almost an impatient gesture. “Who but myself can measure the pang it costs me? I do not look for sympathy! I am stung with congratulations! But you,” and his voice changed to one of almost feminine tenderness and appeal, “you, who by your holy confidence in my sense of right strengthened me for this task,⁠—you will not at least refuse to wish me God-speed?”</p>
			<p>“I? Oh, no!” replied Mabel; and then added, hesitatingly, and scarcely knowing what she said, “I⁠—I wish you every thing that is good.”</p>
			<p>“And you will shrive me before I go?”</p>
			<p>She answered only by looking timidly, anxiously up at him; then her glance wandered quickly round the room, as if she meditated making her escape.</p>
			<p>“Yes, let this be my confessional,” said Bayard, his words following fast upon one another, as if he understood her intention and would not be frustrated in his own purpose. “I may not depart with a light heart, but I would at least carry away with me an easy conscience. I would disburden it of a weight which has laid on it ever since the evening we first met, when, in the blindness of a false and hasty judgment, I spoke, and you overheard the unworthy words, which were repented of as soon as uttered. Can you, will you, forgive me for the blindness, the presumption, the folly for which I have never forgiven myself? Can you deem it a sufficient atonement for my fault, that your first reproachful glance convicted me at once of injustice and libel; that it has haunted my memory ever since; and that I can not be at peace, as long as its shadow is upon my heart.”</p>
			<p>“And is that all?” said Mabel, breathing more freely, while a pensive smile overspread her face, as memory, which had failed to treasure up the wrongs of that eventful evening, led her back to the contemplation of the never-to-be-forgotten benefits which Bayard had generously rendered her in her hour of need.</p>
			<p>“No, it is not all,” exclaimed he, with a returning vehemence and fervor, which he struggled with, vainly endeavoring to be calm. “You overheard me, when I rashly undertook to interpret the character which I had neither the wisdom nor the charity to read aright. I beseech you, then, to listen⁠—to have patience with me⁠—to believe me, when I tell you, that the lesson of goodness, beauty, and truth which you have been teaching me ever since, is such as to make me ready to hide my face and exclaim, ‘So, this is your cold, artificial, worldly woman! Never trust yourself again, Bayard Percival.’ ”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival,” said Mabel, her calmness partially restored, as she saw how much Bayard was moved, “you wrong yourself and me, when you waste so much regret on words spoken at random, and forgiven, I assure you, as promptly as they were truly atoned for. If my mind often recurs to the evening of which you speak, it is not to dwell on my own wounded vanity, but on a kindness which touched me to the heart. Do not ever think of the occasion again, unless you should some day be tempted to doubt that I know what it is to be grateful.”</p>
			<p>Her voice shook and quivered as she uttered the last syllable; and, once more impelled to take refuge in flight, she sprang from her seat and would have darted from the room. But Bayard was on the watch. Something in her manner had led him to anticipate the movement, and, starting up, he caught her by the hand.</p>
			<p>“Stay, Mabel⁠—stay,” cried he, in a voice of deep emotion, while the eyes, usually so mild and gentle, seemed to emit a burning light as he fixed them full on hers. “You must not⁠—you shall not go. I have made but half my confession yet. Hear me for a moment only, and then, if you bid me, I will depart and you shall never see me more.”</p>
			<p>She stopped short⁠—mute, transfixed, and statue-like. Even the hand, which had shaken with a nervous tremor, ceased to flutter, as he held it in his firm grasp. There was something awful and impressive in the agitation of this strong man, usually so calm and self-possessed; and Mabel’s heart almost ceased to beat, as she observed how his broad chest heaved, and his lips refused to give utterance to the thoughts which were working within. But when they came at last, those words of pathos and of power, they seemed to sweep through all the chambers of her soul, penetrating to the very seat of her life, and telling of a love as mighty and strong as the heart that had conceived it was elevated and noble. With all the simplicity and ardor of youth, with all the eloquence and force of mature manhood, did he plead his cause, pouring into her ear the story of a deep and true affection, which had implanted itself in the fibres of his nature more than six years before, and had silently and secretly taken root in the generous soil, to expand and blossom at last in the sunshine of her presence and her smiles.</p>
			<p>“I have loved my Western home with a boyish enthusiasm,” exclaimed he, at length, as having poured forth the tale of his hopes and fears, he scanned her colorless features, and in their marble-like pallor and rigidity could not as yet read his answer. I have rejoiced in the freedom and independence of my unshackled life; I have shrunk from every thing that had a tendency to win me from my favorite pursuits. Still, I could have broken away at the call of duty; I could have looked even exile cheerfully in the face, and dared fortune to do her worst, glorying in my native strength. But it is so no longer. My resolutions are weaker than any child’s; my courage fails me in the most critical moment of my life. I dare not say but that I should have evaded the present call, had not your generous confidence urged me on. But now there is no drawing back. I must break up the habits and associations which have come to possess a nameless charm; I must bid farewell to the spots round which your image will forever cling. Duty bids me depart; and you, too, echo her voice. O Mabel!” His tone was low, sweet, and full of touching earnestness, as he made this final appeal. “O Mabel! must I go alone?”</p>
			<p>The heart which had seemed to stand still, while Bayard unfolded, with passionate fervor, the indwelling secret of his strong love, vibrated with sudden motion as his impetuous words thus gave place to low, half-whispered entreaty; the blood which had seemed to ebb away in a cold, stagnant stream, rushed back in a warm, living current, and the long suppressed, subdued, and hidden emotion of Mabel’s soul was stirred into sudden life. It was no blind sentiment,⁠—no transient preference, which thus lay treasured in the inmost recesses of her being; it was a holy and pure affection, born of gratitude, nursed by time, strengthened by respect, and perfected by that union of habit, principle, thought, and feeling, which moulds two hearts into one. It lay deep, and she had concealed it well; so well, that until now she herself had suspected but half its power. The time had come, however, when it could be repressed no longer. She felt it in the trembling agitation which, commencing within, vibrated through her whole frame, until she tottered where she stood; she betrayed it in the hot, rushing tide which suffused her neck, her cheek, her brow, with crimson, and tingled to her fingers’ ends. She could not speak, but she laid the hand that was free on the hand which Bayard still firmly held; he clasped them both in his, and was answered. The nervous agitation which caused her to tremble like an aspen leaf, was subdued and tranquilized as she felt herself folded in his strong embrace; and the heart which had been schooled by experience, purified by suffering, and ennobled by patient endurance, realized that it had found at last its true, its perfect earthly rest.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>And what did they all say when Mabel’s engagement was announced? for engagements must come out, and everybody must say something.</p>
			<p>It did not come out until the next day, for Bayard returned to the drawing-room at length without his promised bride, who was lost to the family for the remainder of the evening. Murray went to look for her, being anxious that she should witness a brilliant aurora which was visible in the north, but returned to say, that he feared Aunt Mabel had a headache, as she did not open her room door, but begged him to excuse her to Madam Percival and the rest of the company.</p>
			<p>When she awoke, however, the following morning, she found her venerable hostess sitting by her bedside. “Good morning, my dear child,⁠—my dear daughter!” said she, leaning over her, smoothing the hair back from her forehead, and kissing her tenderly. “Bayard has told me all,⁠—it is as I have fondly wished,⁠—I could ask no better comfort for my old age. My son will be very happy, and you⁠—excuse a mother’s partiality, but you will have a husband worthy of you.”</p>
			<p>Mabel sprang up and threw her arms round her dear, respected friend. “Oh, the blessing,” exclaimed she, with tearful eyes, “of knowing, for the first time within my recollection, what it is to claim a mother’s love!”</p>
			<p>“Your union with Bayard, my dear,” said the old lady, “will but set a seal to the compact which my heart made with you long ago. You are mine by adoption, no less than by his choice; it is sweet to me to feel that my affections went out instinctively to meet the daughter soon to become mine by a most holy tie;” and once more pressing Mabel to her bosom, she hastened from the room, to recover the composure which this interview had sensibly disturbed.</p>
			<p>“Come with me,” said Mabel to Bayard, who had been pacing up and down the hall, just outside her door, and was, consequently, the first person whom she met when she left her room. “Come with me to my father.”</p>
			<p>The old gentleman was an early riser, and, as Mabel had anticipated, was up, and sitting alone in front of the library fire. He laid down his spectacles and book as his daughter and their youthful host entered the room together, and gazed at them with no little surprise, for they had the earnest look of persons with a positive object in view. Mabel went behind his chair and whispered in his ear. He looked round at her, half incredulously, then bestowed an earnest, inquiring glance on Percival. “You will be to her the friend that she deserves?” said he at length.</p>
			<p>“I will, Sir, with God’s help,” answered the young man solemnly.</p>
			<p>“Take her, then,” said the father, rising from his chair, and laying a hand on the head of each. “This is unexpected to me, but not unwelcome. If, having been a good daughter is any security that she will be a good wife,” continued he, addressing Bayard, “you will never repent your choice. God bless you both.”</p>
			<p>“Two elections in one day, you lucky fellow!” exclaimed Harry, who came in at the moment, and understood at a glance how matters stood. “I give you joy! and I hope it will not be considered in any degree disparaging to the district which you represent, if I remark, that I consider the last victory you have achieved greater than the first, and a more worthy subject of rejoicing, not only for your sake, but, for that of my dear sister, and of every one who has her happiness at heart.” Though Harry addressed himself to Bayard, his look of affection was fixed on Mabel, whom he drew towards him as he finished speaking, and clasped in a fraternal embrace.</p>
			<p>“I hope you will both be as happy as we are, Mabel dear,” whispered Helen, who had followed her husband into the room. “I can offer you no warmer wish.”</p>
			<p>Bessie now made her appearance in a state of great excitement. She had learned the news from her grandmother, and her delight, which was, no doubt, extreme, was almost lost in the excess of her astonishment. “I never was so cheated in my life,” exclaimed she. “I am provoked, beyond all patience, to think what a game you have been playing almost before my face and eyes,⁠—and I as blind as a bat to the whole thing! Why! isn’t anybody else astonished? I want to know,” and she gazed inquiringly from one face to another. “I thought you disliked my uncle, Miss Vaughan,” said she in an expostulatory tone. “I thought you had an old grudge against him. And so you, Uncle Bayard, propose uniting yourself to an iceberg, after all?” Bayard smiled. Bessie saw that her cutting allusion failed to exercise its accustomed effect. “Mabel has forgiven me,” said Percival. “Your tongue, my little Bessie, has lost its power to wound.”</p>
			<p>There was a marked contrast in the manner with which the boys received the announcement. Murray shouted with joy, and civilly asked Madam Percival’s leave to give three cheers. Alick scanned Percival’s face with as keen and anxious a scrutiny as if he would have pierced to his very soul, kissed Mabel impulsively, rushed from the room and (he was sixteen years old, and a tall boy for his age, but, nevertheless, it must be confessed) he wept.</p>
			<p>“Well, now,” said Sabiah, whom Mabel sought, and informed privately of the event, “you don’t mean so! Upon my word it’s so sudden I don’t know what to think! Why, you never saw him more than half a dozen times in your life,⁠—did you, Mabel?”</p>
			<p>Mabel confessed the frequency with which they had met during her visit at Harry’s.</p>
			<p>“La’s sakes! Then all the time other folks have been electioneering, and so on, he’s spent his time a courtin’. Well, he’s a fine young man; I never had anything in the world against him, except his being so mixed up with politics; and if he has neglected his public interests, as they say, after this fashion, to play the agreeable to his lady-love, I’m thinking his wife will never be second best whatever may turn up; so I guess the heart you’ve won you’re pretty sure to keep against all odds!”</p>
			<p>And Sabiah was right; for with Bayard Percival to love once was to love forever.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
