<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i2">My soul were dark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for the golden light and rainbow hue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, sweeping heaven with their triumphal arc,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Break on the view.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Enough to feel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That God indeed is good! enough to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without the gloomy clouds he could reveal</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">No beauteous bow.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>William Croswell.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>At an early hour, the next morning, a pleasant voice was heard outside Mabel’s door, saying, softly, “Are you awake, my dear?” and was answered by Mabel’s presenting herself, already dressed and equipped for going out.</p>
			<p>“You are on the alert, I see,” said Madam Percival, who also wore her bonnet and shawl, as if prepared for a walk. “I thought I heard your step in the room, or I would not have disturbed you. How have you slept?”</p>
			<p>“Very soundly until daylight; but then I awoke, and, hearing the noise of the Falls, could not resist going out to see them before breakfast.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, you are a girl after my own heart,” said Madam Percival, drawing Mabel’s arm through hers. “I have left word with my woman, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten, to go in and attend to the children’s wants, whenever they awake, so you need feel no anxiety about them;” and the old and the young lady left the hotel together.</p>
			<p>“This is the direction leading to the bridge over the rapids,” said Madam Percival, when they had gained a side street. “I see an old acquaintance of mine⁠—that Indian woman, just opening her little store of wares over opposite⁠—she knows me;” and Madam Percival bowed in kindly recognition to the dusky squaw, whose face was full of eagerness. “I must go and speak to her. Do not wait for me; I will overtake you.” Thus speaking, Madam Percival crossed the road leading to the bridge, and Mabel proceeded alone.</p>
			<p>How tumultuous and how mingled was the rushing tide of thought which assailed her during that short, lonely walk! The time, the place, the solitude⁠—how suggestive were they all! How many of her childhood’s hopes, her girlish anticipations had centred around Niagara! How fondly had she looked forward to this fulfilment of her early dreams! How little had she foreseen the cruel chain of circumstances which had brought her to the spot at last, disappointed, forsaken, and bereaved. A moment more, and, in the stillness of the morning, for the sun had not yet risen, she found herself alone on the bridge, beneath which flowed the angry torrent. Panting from exercise, breathless with her own agitating reflections, and dumb with astonishment and awe, she stood, with parted lips, gazing up that gigantic slope, down which, in wild and frantic speed, the waters were hastening to their fearful plunge. Whence came they and whither did they go⁠—those mad, triumphant waves⁠—which, scorning all opposition and beating down all obstacles, seemed like the very messengers of doom! An instinctive dread took possession of Mabel’s mind, as, gazing long and fixedly at these witnesses to God’s power and majesty, she saw in them types of those recent events which, bearing down like a mighty flood and overwhelming her beneath a torrent of trouble, had left her to struggle helplessly with the current. “All thy waves and thy billows have gone over me, great God,” she exclaimed aloud, at length withdrawing her gaze from a scene whose sublime and solemn grandeur was, to the excited girl, almost lost in a nervous sense of terror.</p>
			<p>Then, as the roar still continued sounding in her ears, an irresistible impulse seized her to hasten on and witness the end, which, at present, she could image to herself only as a dire catastrophe; and, as if fearful that, by a moment’s delay, she should lose something of the awful spectacle which she half longed, half dreaded to behold, she commenced running, and, without pausing to take breath, continued at the same rapid pace until she suddenly gained an elevated point, where, at a glance, she could discern the two rival divisions of the far-famed cataract. She gazed for an instant only, at the dark and angry waters, on which the sun, now just below the verge of the horizon, had not yet shed his beams, and which, as they plunged down the fearful vortex, seemed to her bewildered senses to utter only a message of stern and angry wrath; then throwing herself on the ground, with her face hid against a huge overhanging rock, she burst into a fit of passionate and uncontrollable weeping. Her excited feelings having thus found vent, however, and her strained nerves being relieved by this free and natural outburst, she soon became more calm, and at length lay quite still, listening, without terror, to the roar of the waters, when, suddenly, she heard, close beside her, in measured and familiar accents, the solemn words,⁠—“And I heard, as it were, the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”</p>
			<p>There was a pause; then a long-drawn sigh escaped Mabel, and attracted the attention of Madam Percival, who had not until then perceived her.</p>
			<p>“What! are you here before me, and in my favorite spot, my child?” exclaimed she; then seeing the despairing attitude and covered face of Mabel, and at once conjecturing that, in the weak state of her nervous system, she had been overcome by the scene, she sat down beside her and said, in a self-reproving tone, “Ah! I should not have let you come here alone.”</p>
			<p>“It frightens me,” said Mabel, with a shudder. “I should not have minded the fall so much,⁠—but those dreadful rapids!” and again a slight shudder passed over her frame. “It seemed as if everything were pouring down at once just as⁠—just as”⁠—</p>
			<p>“Just as trouble comes upon us poor mortals, you would say, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I could not help thinking of myself.”</p>
			<p>“I have often had the same thought,” said Madam Percival, soothingly; “but I have also found here a lesson of faith and hope, which has fortified me in the hour of trouble, and which I trusted you would have learned here, too. Often are we borne through the rushing waves of anxiety, suspense, and pain, and plunged at last down the gulf of a mighty sorrow; but let us not be faithless or despairing. He who has meted out the bounds of the earth has said to human suffering, as to the mighty torrent, ‘Thus far shalt thou go and no farther;’ and even amid the shock of a great calamity, we know that the raging torrent of affliction is spanned by the rainbow of His love. Look up, my dear, look up.”</p>
			<p>Mabel lifted her head quickly, as her attention was thus earnestly claimed, and above the watery abyss, which a few moments before had been so dark and fearful, a glorious rainbow danced and quivered in the beams of the newly-risen sun; and, as the glittering spray caught and reflected the rays of light in new forms of radiance, another and another brilliant arch stretched its graceful curve across the foaming flood.</p>
			<p>A smile of joy flashed out from Mabel’s face, effecting in it a transformation scarcely less striking than that which had so suddenly been wrought in the face of nature; she clasped her hands, and stood for some moments in a rapt and serene silence.</p>
			<p>Madam Percival watched the play of her features with affectionate interest; and, as the anxious and troubled expression of her countenance was gradually superseded by the glow of a Heavenly peace, she said in a low and fervent tone, “Ah! my child, it is only when the light of the Sun of Righteousness comes to illumine our darkened hearts, that we can comprehend the love of Him who is continually confirming his ancient promise⁠—“It shall come to pass when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud.”</p>
			<p>“I have realized it many times,” said Mabel, eagerly; “I realize it now.”</p>
			<p>“It is shining in your face, my love,” said Madam Percival. “Come, let us go back to the hotel, and cheer with it the little orphan hearts which must look to you henceforward to be the sunshine of their lives.</p>
			<p>“Is it not grand? is it not encouraging and ennobling?” said Madam Percival, when, some hours later, they sat together on the flat surface of Table Rock, watching the gigantic waters of the Horse Shoe Fall. “In the course of a long life, I have visited this spot many times, and I have invariably gone away refreshed and strengthened, as if I had been listening to the voice of a sacred oracle. Especially when the chastening of God’s providence was heavy upon me, have I been cheered by this glorious proclamation of the truth, that His power goes hand in hand with His love.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot thank you enough for bringing me here,” said Mabel;⁠—“it is a remembrance for a life-time.”</p>
			<p>“I confess,” said the old lady, “my first thought was merely to divert your mind from dwelling too fixedly on your recent trials. I did not realize how fully you were open to impressions from nature. Now I cannot be too thankful for the prompting which bade me lead you to this school of high thoughts and noble purposes. God grant, my child, that your young life, sanctified by the divine blessing, may flow on in as strong, deep, and tranquil a current, as that of this noble river, whose waters, henceforward, with only now and then a temporary interruption, sweep calmly on to the eternal ocean. You, indeed, need moral courage and strength, my child, for it is a noble mission which you have before you.”</p>
			<p>“You mean the care of the children,” said Mabel, observing that Madam Percival’s eye was fixed upon the boys, who were playing at a little distance?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,⁠—the training of these young minds and hearts is an office of true dignity and greatness, and one in which you have all my sympathy. I, too, have educated boys, and my work is not yet finished. If I read those little fellows’ characters aright, your responsibility is as great as your influence is unbounded. That eldest child loves you with a devotion which I have rarely seen equalled in one of his years. It is through that love that he must learn to cherish those universal sympathies, in which I suspect him to be deficient, and that happy, affectionate, beautiful, spoiled plaything yonder, who is at this moment attracting the attention of strangers, will develope impulses and propensities of so wide a range, that all the ardor of his nature must be early taught to concentrate itself on the pure, the elevated, and the good. Remember, my dear, that your counsels may rule in many generations of hearts, and, if the thought will add sanctity to your office, cherish the belief that the principles you instil, may help to mould the future fortunes of this free republic.”</p>
			<p>A shade of earnest thought and holy resolution was stamped on Mabel’s attentive face, as, with her eyes intently fixed on the children, she listened to the solemn charge of her experienced and venerable friend. It would have been difficult to pronounce which was the nobler countenance of the two; that of the benevolent and Christian matron who thus uttered the words of warning and of wisdom, or that of the enthusiastic and truth-loving girl, into whose heart they sunk with a deep and lasting power. Madam Percival gazed into the earnest face of Mabel, and her heart warmed anew towards her, as she read in every expressive feature a hopeful prophecy for the future,⁠—a prophecy which after years saw gloriously fulfilled.</p>
			<p>We pass over the departure from Niagara, after a visit which, though brief, was memorable to at least two of the little company, between whom there had, then and there, been sealed the compact of a friendship, rendered the more sacred by the wide difference in their years. All were refreshed and strengthened for continuing the journey; and the joy of the children, and the relief and satisfaction of Mabel were complete, when, at the steamboat wharf in Buffalo, they met Owen, who, poor fellow, had suffered the most intense anxiety on their account, and who at once became a sharer in their gratitude to Madam Percival, as was evident from his clumsy but honest expression of thanks, and still more from his unwearied and deferential services to her during the remainder of the journey. “Upon my word, Ma’am,” said he, “when I found they were off, and nobody to see to ’em, I was e’en a’most crazed; and when, to crown the whole, I found Miss Vaughan’s purse in my pocket, I believe I went clean mad. Why, I’d a fired one of the engines, and come off on my own hook, but ’twas no use; I just had to cool down and learn patience by waitin’. But I see, and bless the Lord for it too, the young lady wa’n’t without a protector, nor never will be in this world, I’ve a notion,⁠—sartin not if she has her deserts; and I make bold to thank you for your goodness on my own account, Ma’am, and for the relief it is to my conscience;” and taking off his hat and bowing, as he had been wont to bow to Rosy, he drew back a step and added, “Owen Dowst’s your servant for life, Ma’am.” Madam Percival was one who could appreciate the simplicity and worth of Mabel’s humble escort; and before their travels together were at an end, he had learned to look upon this lady, as almost every one did who came under her influence, as a reliable friend. She talked intelligently with him of farms, stock and crops; gave him much valuable information regarding Western life, and when he finally ventured to consult her with reference to the investment of his little property, she entered into his schemes with as ready an interest as if she had been a professed land-agent and he a wealthy speculator.</p>
			<p>Thus all went on happily and harmoniously, and Mabel, with Madam Percival for her counsellor and friend, Owen as the devoted attendant of herself and the children, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten, who shared all the interests of her beloved mistress, to minister to her wants, and relieve her of little cares, found her formidable journey drawing to a safe conclusion, and almost sighed as she thought how soon she must part from these valued and tried friends of her adversity.</p>
			<p>The last night of their sojourn in each other’s company was passed on board a canal-boat. The children had gone to sleep in the cabin; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Patten was watching beside them; Owen, at the stern of the boat, was giving voluntary aid in the stowing of some freight, and Madam Percival and Mabel were seated on deck, holding the last of those pleasant and valuable conversations which they had enjoyed together.</p>
			<p>“I am glad you like this Western country,” said Madam Percival, “and that you do not feel discouraged by its yet rough and undeveloped character. It is a great field, and one in which comparatively little has yet been accomplished. You will find much that is strange, uncouth, and utterly at variance with all your preconceived ideas; but to a noble mind there is a satisfaction in overcoming difficulties, and every effort is sure to find its reward in a land which makes such a rich return for the labor bestowed on it.”</p>
			<p>“It excites all my enthusiasm,” said Mabel. “I have felt, a hundred times on our journey, as if I would gladly stop short at any given point, and remain a year or more, to watch the progress which could almost be seen in passing, and of which I hear such wonderful accounts on every side.”</p>
			<p>“Say rather,” said Madam Percival, “to take part in that progress. Do not consider yourself excluded by your age or sex from exerting an active influence on the growth and true civilization of any spot in which you are either temporarily or permanently a resident. In a country whose physical development is so unexampled as this, too much effort cannot be made to insure a proportionate advance in moral and spiritual growth. It may be that your influence and example must be confined to a narrow circle, but do not forget that, however restricted may be your sphere, it is woman’s peculiar privilege and province to exert that softening, elevating, purifying spirit, which sanctifies the ruder labors of life, and sheds abroad in the community a nobler ambition than that of building cities in the wilderness, and subduing the elements to human will. Above all, my dear, do not consider your life in the West a period of exile; this is but a part of our mother country, destined, in time perhaps, to become in its influence, what it already is in its locality,⁠—the centre and heart of the republic.”</p>
			<p>“I am already accustoming myself,” said Mabel, “to look upon it as my future home, for such it may eventually become.”</p>
			<p>“Make it a home, my dear,” said Madam Percival, “for yourself and your family; at least, while you remain in it, give it your affection and your best efforts,⁠—it is the only way to render it a happy residence or a useful one. I have homes in several parts of our country, and it would be hard for me to say which I love best. It is now fifteen years since I accompanied my husband into this then unsettled region. He was one of the pioneers of civilization, and the affection which I then conceived for this Western valley has continued in full force ever since. It has been with great satisfaction that I have made successive pilgrimages hither, and now that I have come to finish my days, perhaps, in this land of promise, I do not feel willing to consider it the home of my adoption, but simply my native soil.”</p>
			<p>“If you were only to be near me,” said Mabel, “it would be such a comfort; your counsel would be so precious.”</p>
			<p>“Forty miles is not counted a very great distance in this part of the world, my dear; and that, as nearly as I can judge, is the distance between your father’s estate and that of my son. My hand, owing to one of the infirmities of age, has recently been disabled from writing, but I shall find a way, one of these days, to communicate with my young friends, and shall always be rejoiced to hear from you in return. But, good night; I will not keep you up any longer to listen to an old woman’s preaching.”</p>
			<p>Before morning they had reached the bustling Western city where their united route terminated. Mabel and the children took passage in the clumsy carriage in which they were to commence their last day’s journey; Owen set out for another part of the country; and Madam Percival, having seen her adopted charges on their way, proceeded to the house of a friend, where she was to await her son’s arrival in the city.</p>
			<p>It was a cold, rainy, and uncomfortable evening, when, with the horses weary and steaming, and the children exhausted with cold and fatigue, Mabel, almost hopeless of ever reaching their destination, which had seemed all day to recede as they advanced, at length heard from their driver the joyful words, “That ’ere’s <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s house where you see the light over yonder.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t cry; we are almost there, Murray!” she exclaimed, encouragingly, to the poor weeping child, who, sadly feeling the want of Madam Percival’s shawls and Owen’s pilot cloth coat, was shivering with the cold, from which all Mabel’s care could ill protect him, and who, hungry, dissatisfied, and out of humor, had complained and cried bitterly for the last half hour. “Look over there, beyond the river⁠—that is grandpa’s house; you will soon see him and Uncle Harry.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to see them! I hate this place! I won’t stay here!” sobbed Murray.</p>
			<p>“It will be better than riding all night, though, Murray; won’t it?” said Alick, in the same patient, philosophical tone which the little man had maintained from the commencement of the journey.</p>
			<p>“Ye’ll have to get out here and step up a piece,” said the driver, halting within a few rods of the house. “My road turns off here to the post-office, and these horses is dead beat, that’s a fact.”</p>
			<p>Mabel needed no second bidding; she was only too glad to trust to her own feet, to which eagerness lent wings, and in an instant more, with Murray in her arms and Alick close beside her, she hastened in the direction of the light, opened the unlocked door of the house, and entered. She found herself in a dark passage, and was groping for the inner door, when it was suddenly thrown open; and, with a cry of joy, she set Murray on the floor, and flung her arms around the neck of her astonished brother.</p>
			<p>Had it been the ghost of Mabel instead of Mabel herself, it could have created no greater surprise and consternation. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who was sitting in an arm-chair by the fire, turned his head as Harry uttered her name, and seeing his daughter before him, became pale, tried twice to rise from his seat, then sank back as if seized by sudden giddiness, while a look of deep distress passed over his haggard features.</p>
			<p>“Mabel here!” was his exclamation.</p>
			<p>She had thrown herself on the floor beside him, and with both arms resting on his knee, was looking him earnestly in the face before he had finished speaking the words. “Yes, father; Mabel and the boys.”</p>
			<p>“Alick! Murray! What does it all mean?” cried the old man, greatly agitated⁠—“their mother?”</p>
			<p>There was a pause⁠—a long, long pause⁠—no one spoke. Alick hung down his head. Murray crept to the fire and kept on sobbing.</p>
			<p>“Their mother, Mabel?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, again, in a tone of anxious inquiry.</p>
			<p>“They have no mother in this world but me, father,” answered Mabel, in a hollow whisper.</p>
			<p>The head of the afflicted parent dropped upon his bosom. Harry came up, untied Mabel’s bonnet, smoothed her hair with his hands, kissed her hastily, and walked to the other end of the room to hide his agitation. She rose and stood looking into the fire.</p>
			<p>“Is she dead? How did it happen? When did she die? Where?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, at last, in a choked voice.</p>
			<p>Mabel gave a simple outline of the facts. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan held fast to the sides of his chair, as if needing support, and presently Harry came back, and watching Mabel’s countenance, listened also to the story. Now and then, one or the other asked some anxious question, and at length amid sighs, sobs, and secret shudderings, the sad tale was fully told. There was a second long silence, broken only by Murray’s cries, and then succeeded other questionings and other cares; the weary young travellers⁠—their long, hard journey; the trying experiences of Mabel; the exposures and deprivations of the poor children; their present necessities and wants⁠—all in turn demanded consideration, and were in turn discussed. Murray’s loud complaints of cold and hunger were promptly responded to by Harry, who piled on more wood and went to consult the larder, and, through his good housekeeping and Mabel’s ingenuity, arrangements were soon made by which the newly-arrived party could be comfortably accommodated for the night.</p>
			<p>“How happened you to think of coming here, Mabel?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, when, supper being concluded and the children gone to bed, she had quietly seated herself beside him, with the satisfied, contented air of one who having suffered much has found a place of repose at last.</p>
			<p>“I did not know what else to do, father,” was her simple answer.</p>
			<p>The same distressed look returned to his face which had marked it on the first announcement of her arrival; he moved uneasily in his chair, glanced at the bare, plastered walls and meagre furniture of their only parlor, and then, gazing at her with mingled pride and pity, ejaculated mournfully, “It is not a fit place for you, my child. I would have spared you this.”</p>
			<p>Mabel, grieved at perceiving how deeply he felt the trial of seeing his beloved daughter reduced to such humble fortunes, made haste to assure him of her perfect satisfaction and joy in sharing his Western abode. He interrupted her, however, shook his head in a troubled, discontented manner, and glanced once more around the room, saying, “Ah, well! it may do for awhile, perhaps⁠—a week or so, until I get my affairs settled.”</p>
			<p>It seemed, indeed, as if his paternal grief at the death of Louise was secondary to this one absorbing regret; and as if in contemplating the trials and mortifications to which his favorite child had been suddenly reduced, he had forgotten every other cause of sorrow; for, when at last he took his candle to retire for the night, he laid his hand on Mabel’s head, and said in a consolatory tone, “Never mind, my daughter! It is only for a season, while Harry practises a little shooting and I settle up my affairs, and then we will all go home again.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid father is sorry I came, Harry,” said Mabel, as the brother and sister were also about to separate.</p>
			<p>“No, no, indeed,” replied Harry; “only he feels, as any body must, that this is a new style of things for you to be brought to⁠—this bivouac in the wilderness⁠—this hunting-lodge in the prairie⁠—for that is all it is fit for.”</p>
			<p>“If he only cares on my account⁠—if you are sure of that, Harry, I am content,” said Mabel. “He shall see how happy I can be here.”</p>
			<p>“Dear Mabel,” said Harry, looking at her tenderly, “how much you have suffered⁠—how much you have been through since we parted!”</p>
			<p>“We will not think of it now,” said she, smiling through her tears. “I am with my father and you, Harry. I have nothing more to ask.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
