<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Labour is good for man, bracing up his energies to conquest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And without it life is dull, the man perceiving himself useless.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr class="name">M. F.</abbr> Tupper.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The short, frosty days of winter were gradually giving way to the bright influences of spring, though as yet there was little indication in the bare, brown prairie, the leafless trees, or the chilly atmosphere, of any other reign than that of the wintry tyrant. The sun, however, rode higher in the firmament and continued longer above the horizon, and the light snows which fell now and then during the night, could not resist the power which his rays had acquired at noon. It was that season when good housewives improve the long days for the accomplishment of what they term their spring work; and Mabel, in virtue of her thriftiness, devoted all the time she could spare from her other vocations, to the diligent plying of her needle, a species of industry which the family wants imperatively demanded.</p>
			<p>She was sitting at the window towards the close of an afternoon in the early part of April, busily occupied at her sewing, and Harry, at the opposite side of the room, was engaged with a book. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan was absent on one of his frequent excursions; the boys, wrapped in their warm great coats, had gone with James the farmer to enjoy his skill in calling together the cows, which had strayed to a distance, and the house was quiet and undisturbed. Occasionally Harry laid down his book and yawned, then rose, gazed first from one window and then another, and finally resuming his seat, with his elbow resting on the half-closed volume, watched Mabel attentively and thoughtfully, as, unconscious of observation she stitched away on the garment, which she was anxious to finish that evening. Neither of them had spoken for a half hour or more, when Harry suddenly startled his sister with the abrupt remark, “Mabel, I am tired of this kind of life; I am going to work.”</p>
			<p>She lifted her earnest, brown eyes for an instant to his face, with a half incredulous, half inquiring look, then dropped them again and kept on sewing.</p>
			<p>“It does very well,” continued he, “to call our farm-house here a bivouac, an encampment, and a hunting-lodge. It sounds temporary, and seems encouraging, and answers for a jest; but it is no jesting matter,⁠—this Western life to which we have become reduced⁠—it is a sober reality.”</p>
			<p>Mabel made no reply; she only looked more steadily at her work. He studied her face for a moment, but could not read its expression, the features were so fixed. “All we can do now is to make the best of it,” said he, as he rose once more and walked up and down the room. Then pausing opposite to her he exclaimed, in a tone at once emphatic and full of deep and tender feeling, “Mabel, this is all a humbug⁠—this great scheme of father’s. The poor old gentleman is laboring under a delusion.”</p>
			<p>Her head dropped lower and lower on her bosom, a great tear fell upon her needle and glittered like a dewdrop,⁠—another blinded her eye; still she feigned to be busy as ever with her work.</p>
			<p>“He is wasting his life away chasing after a shadow. Did you know it?” asked Harry, in a tone of gentle, anxious inquiry.</p>
			<p>She answered only by an affirmative nod. She had known it so long; she had read it so many times in the old man’s face; she had felt it so to her heart’s core, and treasured it there so religiously, as a fatal secret, that now to hear it spoken out, and to find herself assenting to the truth, seemed almost like a sacrilege, or the betrayal of a trust.</p>
			<p>“And you knew that the rest of the property was lost; that every thing had been sacrificed to this hopeless speculation; that the New York house and all its contents went under the hammer long ago; and that this was our only home?”</p>
			<p>Harry put these questions in quick succession, as each received the same silent but expressive reply with which Mabel had responded to his first query; then added, gazing into her face meanwhile with wonder and admiration, “So you have never been blinded for a moment to the true state of things? You have never been deceived by all the prophecies of better days? You have realized from the beginning that we were a ruined family, and yet you have seemed as cheerful as if we were at the top of fortune’s ladder, and have labored as steadily as if you had the most brilliant ends in view! I never would have believed it of any woman. Mabel, you are an angel!”</p>
			<p>“No, I am not an angel,” said she, looking up with a half smile; “nor are we a ruined family. I have learned to appreciate a home if it is ever so humble; and if it were not for <em>his</em> disappointment, of which I can not bear to think, we might be very happy yet. You, and the boys, and I, will all acknowledge that this winter has been much better spent than the last.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the highest and best sense, we have all improved,” said Harry; “and we know who we have to thank for it. You and I have been but idle dogs,” continued he, patting the head of his favorite setter, “but we have at least done no harm for the last six months, and one of us has not found the time wholly wasted, since it has sown the seeds of some good resolutions. Yes, Mabel, your industry and patience have been at once a reproach and an incentive to me. I am determined to be no longer a drone in the hive⁠—I am going to work.”</p>
			<p>There was a manly earnestness in Harry’s tone which made it impossible to doubt his sincerity, and Mabel, both by voice and countenance, expressed an eager interest and pleasure in his declaration, which encouraged him to explain himself still further.</p>
			<p>It seemed that the young man’s time during the winter months had not been wholly devoted to hunting, though it was on an excursion of this nature that the impulse became awakened which eventually led to important results. He had gone to a greater distance than usual from home, and in company with some young English officers from beyond the Canadian frontier, had been on the track of a deer which had recently been seen in the vicinity, and, in the engrossing interest of the chase, had become separated from his companions just at the close of the short winter’s day. In the darkness which immediately ensued, he was for some hours lost in the forest; but at length, guided by the friendly light of a log hut, he succeeded in reaching a place of shelter, which he recognized as the cabin of an Indian half-breed who had once before been his host on a similar occasion.</p>
			<p>But he was not now, as before, the only guest. A rival huntsman had preceded him, and, outside the door, lay the carcass of the deer, slain by this successful follower of the chase. It proved, however, to be neither of Harry’s previous companions who had thus borne away the honors, but an accidental competitor for the prize, who, travelling in the neighborhood, was indebted to his quick eye and ready rifle for a success which he could scarcely be said to have sought. The stranger was a young man, not many years Harry’s senior, and in the close proximity to which the new lodgers were subjected in their narrow quarters, an acquaintance naturally ensued, which the next day’s journey, passed in each other’s society, was also destined to confirm.</p>
			<p>The manners and bearing of the expert hunter had at once proclaimed him to be a gentleman, and his knowledge and cultivation proved him to be one of no ordinary attainments; for, while his whole conversation was marked by elevation of sentiment and refinement of taste, his information ranged over a wide field of topics, and he seemed equally at home on a question of foreign policy, or the details of Western farming. Of the latter he had, considering his youth, enjoyed a large experience⁠—enjoyment being most truly the term for expressing the enthusiastic and hearty interest which he felt in the growth and development of the resources afforded by the extensive plantation lands of which he was the proprietor. These lands were not very far distant from one portion of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s estate; and as Harry listened to the young stranger’s animated account of his own successful experiments in agriculture, and the almost fabulous crops which the rich soil was capable of yielding, his attention was, for the first time, directed to the uncommon facilities he himself possessed for embarking in similar pursuits.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s Western property, although purchased solely with reference to one absorbing scheme, included large tracts of arable land, which, at present lying waste, might be easily brought under cultivation. Industry and perseverance alone were wanting to compel them to yield their tribute. The broad acres which had disappointed the eager speculator might yet reward the patient husbandman; and while the father only dreamed of golden harvests, the son might sow and reap them.</p>
			<p>The ambition thus awakened was not destined to die out for want of encouragement. The accident which had introduced Harry to the owner of a model farm, had also secured to him a wise counsellor and a judicious friend;⁠—a man who had the force and energy of character which are calculated to command influence, and the disinterested and lofty aims which insure its being exercised in a right direction. Moreover, he seemed to have Harry’s welfare particularly at heart, and spared no pains to establish his manly purposes, and aid him in their accomplishment. He invited him to visit his estate, pointed out the evidences of remarkable success and occasional failure which constituted his own experience, and accompanied him on a survey of that part of his father’s land which was best adapted to agricultural purposes.</p>
			<p>Thus, at the opening of spring, Harry’s plans were ripe, and he himself ready and eager for action. The simple structure which was for the present to constitute his dwelling, was already in process of erection, and he had only delayed communicating these facts to Mabel because he dreaded to disclose those other truths which were involved in his decision, and which, he feared, would prove crushing to her hopes.</p>
			<p>He had not counted on that womanly instinct which could not be deceived in reference to their broken fortunes, nor measured the strength of that woman’s heart which rose superior to the shock. Nor had he anticipated, therefore, the exultant and joyful emotions which the revelation of his own projects awakened in his warm-hearted and sympathizing sister. Not only was the thought of honest labor, in the tilling of the generous soil, attractive to her newly-developed tastes, but, in devoting himself with such ardor to the work, Harry had set the seal, as it were, to his hoped-for reformation. If there was one thing she had dreaded for him more than another, it was idleness, the almost certain harbinger of evil. That temptation was now at an end; and, looking through the long vista of coming years, Mabel seemed, with prophetic vision to behold her stripling brother, over whose idleness and folly she had often wept bitter tears, developing into the athletic, honored, redeemed, and useful citizen.</p>
			<p>“We shall miss you sadly, Harry,” said she, when the story of his plans and expectations was fully told; “but oh, how happy you will be! and what a fund of interest we shall have in your new farm and its prospects!”</p>
			<p>“You will not be ashamed of me then, when I come home on my Sunday visits?”</p>
			<p>“Ashamed? I shall glory in you, Harry. I only wish you were to be with us constantly; and I do not quite understand now why you thought it best to commence operations on such a distant part of the property.”</p>
			<p>“For many reasons,” answered Harry. “First and foremost, the advantages of transportation are infinitely better there. For more than two miles the land borders on the canal, and there is a large and growing city some twenty miles distant, which will furnish a permanent market for grain. Then, although you and I appreciate the dignity of labor, and feel its necessity, it is quite the reverse with father, who still clings to his charts, and sees a fortune marked out on them. It would be a daily torture to him to watch the upturning of this land, for any purpose so humble as that to which I propose to convert it. Besides, I am not sure but what influences me more than anything else is the fact that my friend Percival’s farm will be within half a day’s ride of my own. By the way, Mabel,” added he, observing an eager lighting up of her countenance, “I did not think, did I, to tell you that my excellent, whole-souled neighbor is the son of your charming old lady⁠—and she is a fine old lady, to be sure. I saw her for the first time last week. She inquired particularly after you and the children, and sent her love, which I should think you would be proud to have.”</p>
			<p>“I am, indeed,” exclaimed Mabel with delight, “and proud that you should have her son for a friend; he must be a noble man, educated by such a mother. Why did you not tell me this before? It wholly alters the case. What a pleasant coincidence! and how fortunate you are, Harry! You will have constant enjoyment in the society of that family. I almost envy you the privilege of living near our dear Madam Percival.”</p>
			<p>Harry laughed at her enthusiasm, but, at the same time acknowledged how fully he shared it. “Although I have learned by experience,” said he, “to be cautious in forming friendships, or boasting of them, I do believe that Percival’s example, and the influence of his cheerful, high-toned character, will do more than anything else to save me from becoming disheartened and desponding, especially as I shall not always have you at hand, May. It is strange what a recollection constantly haunts me of having seen his handsome face somewhere before. I cannot help thinking I must have met him when I was travelling in Europe. I told him so the other day, when he spoke of having been abroad, but he only answered⁠—‘possibly.’ ”</p>
			<p>As the season was now nearly at hand when Harry’s presence would be constantly required at his farm, and many of his arrangements were still incomplete, his communication to Mabel was but the precursor to his bidding her farewell, and a few weeks later saw him established in his bachelor’s cottage, at about thirty miles distance, which, with the exception of an occasional visit to his family, thenceforward constituted his permanent residence. His father, incredulous of his perseverance, and indifferent to such trivial schemes, assented readily to the proposition which his son made, in due form, for the use of the land, but manifested neither interest nor confidence in the result. Mabel, on the other hand, strong in hope, and relying on Harry’s diligence and skill, encouraged him with her strong faith, and strengthened him with words of cheer; and Harry, remembering and believing in the promises, sowed his seed in the morning, and in the evening withheld not his hand; and the early and the latter rain watered and refreshed his furrows, and finally, when the autumn came, the earth brought forth her increase.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
