<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 31</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>But never, in her varied sphere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is woman to the soul more dear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than when the homely task she plies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cheerful duty in her eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, every lowly path well trod,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looks meekly upward to her God</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Caroline Gilman.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>“Out West” is an indefinite term, whose limit has never been circumscribed, and never can be fairly reached until civilization, marching on with its measured stride, has set its foot upon every inch of ground between the Atlantic and the Pacific shores. At the time of which we write, however, the States which form the eastern and western boundaries of the Mississippi were the chief theatre of emigration; though many a bold trapper and backwoodsman began to feel the atmosphere oppressive with the breath of numbers, and to yearn for still deeper solitudes.</p>
			<p>The tract of land which, about a year before, had recommended itself to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy as a favorable object of speculation, and had subsequently become the joint property of himself and his father-in-law, was a wide and level belt of alternate woodland and prairie, which, stretching for many miles along the shore of a considerable river, afforded an obvious and practicable route for a newly projected railroad. It was with the view of monopolizing the locality, and profiting by the enormous rise in value which was anticipated, that the original purchase had been determined on; and, as the scheme gained new favor in the eyes of the eager speculators, and the subject became more engrossing, larger and larger investments were made, until, at length, all other considerations were excluded, and their landed interests became to both gentlemen a subject of vital importance.</p>
			<p>Unfortunately, however, for the realization of their hopes, the River Valley Railroad, with all the expectations which were centred in it, still continued a mere project of the brain. True, it was thought of, talked of, and planned, but as yet the fulfilment of the enterprise was postponed; some believed that the cities which it was destined to connect were not of sufficient importance to warrant the undertaking, and all were agreed to wait until the time was more fully ripe for action;⁠—all, save the disappointed land-owners, whose fortunes and patience could ill brook this unforeseen and fatal delay. Meanwhile, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s affairs began to suffer embarrassment; a large portion of his capital was embarked in an adventure which yielded him no returns; he was obliged to look to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan for assistance, and by degrees nearly all his share of the Western property was transferred to his father-in-law, in consideration of heavy sums advanced for his relief. Nor could <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan long sustain the double burden of his own and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s responsibilities. His resources became gradually crippled, and a train of pecuniary disasters succeeded, which, together with Harry’s debts, involved him in financial difficulties to an alarming extent. It was at this crisis that he hastened to the scene where all his hopes for the future were centred, firm in the belief that his presence and influence would give new vigor to the enterprise which was destined to restore and redouble his fortune, and resolved at all hazards and at every sacrifice to pursue the object of his excited anticipations. Thus, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s sudden death, his declared insolvency, and the fresh embarrassments which ensued, rendered a large amount of capital necessary for redeeming his remaining share of the property and confirming <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s shattered credit, the latter hesitated not to adopt the only expedient left him, and part with his residence in New York rather than relinquish his great financial scheme, or admit any new partner to his plans and prospects. And when, finally, having by this desperate remedy secured himself from interference, he relaxed his zealous efforts, and, worn with labor, anxiety, and the shock of disaster, sought for awhile the repose and seclusion of his Western farm-house, it was merely with the view of recruiting his exhausted energies and preparing for a further contest with difficulties and opposition.</p>
			<p>That his residence there would be otherwise than temporary,⁠—that Mabel would ever dream of joining him, and sharing his deprivations,⁠—still less that his grandchildren would be brought thither for protection and shelter, had never once entered the old man’s busy and overtasked brain; and yet, by a train of circumstances, at once natural and strange, the remnant of his diminished family were united under the humble roof, where they seemed destined for an indefinite period to constitute a common household.</p>
			<p>Mabel Vaughan was not the first among the women of this fair land who have suddenly waked from a dream of luxury to the homely realities of Western life. Many are the daughters, mothers, and wives, who, born and reared amid wealth and fashion, have gone out into the wilderness with hearts brave enough to meet adversity, and strong enough to conquer it; proving by their self-denying fortitude, that there is no sphere of life so exalted that it may not be made the school of the humblest virtues, and none so lowly, that it may not become the scene of the purest and most lasting triumphs. Nor is it too much to affirm, that, while manly enterprise and vigor have been put forth with unparalleled energy, the success which has redeemed the waste land, and made the wilderness glad, is no less due to the cheerful sacrifices, the patient toil, and the sympathizing heart of woman.</p>
			<p>The sphere into which Mabel was thus suddenly introduced was one which gave scope to every faculty, and taxed her powers to the utmost. There was not only much to do, but much that was to be undone and recommenced, for Harry’s boasted housekeeping presented a singular medley of successes and failures, and, in the eyes of a capable woman, a gradual but thorough reformation was essential to domestic comfort. The establishing of order in the household was, however, but a small part of her task. There was an aged father to cheer, a brother to whom her sympathy and companionship were the only safeguard, and two orphan boys to be cared for, governed, and educated. The contemplation of the toils and trials which these duties must necessarily involve, might well cause the heart to shrink with dismay, and the hands to refuse their unwonted office. But Mabel did not pause to contemplate them, and here lay her chief security from dejection or apathy. She was strong in youth and health; with spirits which had retained their elasticity in spite of severe discipline, and a heart so imbued with earnest faith and Christian self-devotion that, in the cause of those she loved, no effort could be hopeless, and no labor burdensome. Thus she counted not up her toils, and brooded not upon her difficulties, but setting herself with cheerful alacrity to the work which lay nearest at hand, she performed it with ready zeal, and one by one, unconsciously to herself, the various offices which she filled assumed their due order and significance, and her daily life became a beautiful and a sacred mission.</p>
			<p>“Doesn’t the tea-kettle boil yet, Harry?” exclaimed she, in a lively tone, as she joined her brother in the kitchen the morning after her arrival, and found him engaged in his bachelor task of preparing breakfast.</p>
			<p>“Alick,” she cried to her little nephew, who was cowering over the fire, “do you see that great heap of pine chips out by the wood pile?⁠—suppose you run out and get some; let Murray go with you, and carry the basket, that’s a good boy; run Murray, and get warm. Oh, Harry!” and she lifted a cover, “how beautifully you have broiled that chicken!⁠—you are equal to any French cook, but you have forgotten the coffee!” and she glanced at the empty coffee-pot.</p>
			<p>“Just like me,” said Harry, good humoredly; “a fair specimen of my ability. I have nearly let the fire out, too.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind, here comes Alick with his chips; how many times I have helped <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert make the tea-kettle boil on a Sunday evening, when Bridget was away.”</p>
			<p>A few moments more, and the important omission on Harry’s part was amply atoned for;⁠—the coffee was foaming and bubbling merrily. Mabel had placed the white bread, and sweet, fresh butter, upon the table⁠—a few new-laid eggs had been produced from the cupboard, and everything gave promise of a sumptuous meal.</p>
			<p>“Here comes Murray; what has he got?” shouted Alick, as the little fellow entered, rosy and eager with excitement, and hugging to his breast a small, fur-clad animal.</p>
			<p>“A ’possum,” answered the child, “a live ’possum! James, the farmer, gave it to me.”</p>
			<p>Alick pressed forward to see this novel pet, Harry laughed, and Mabel exclaimed, “Why, Murray, what would the New York boys say, if they knew you had an opossum? You must get James to make a house for it to live in. Go and take hold of grandfather’s hand, Alick,” whispered she, “and ask him to walk in to breakfast.”</p>
			<p>“Boots on top of the flour-barrel, and powder and shot on the same shelf with the sugar-bowl!” was Mabel’s inward comment, as, an hour or two later, she made a careful inspection of some of the closets. “That will never do! What is there in that cupboard under the stairs, Alick?” she inquired aloud of her active and willing little assistant.</p>
			<p>“Nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Then that is just the place for boots and shoes; it must have been made for the purpose. The sporting materials must stay here, I suppose, until Uncle Harry can find a better place for them. But this nice China tea-set must be taught to keep better company; how came it among all this crockery and earthen ware, I wonder!”</p>
			<p>These and similar marks of carelessness could be corrected on the instant; but it was a less easy task to remedy the numerous inconsistencies which the house and furniture everywhere exhibited.</p>
			<p>The plain wooden dwelling, though in many respects convenient, was utterly destitute of ornament, and, in its interior finish, was rough and homely in the extreme. It was one of those cheap structures, which, in the order of progress, rank next to the log house, and which, built solely for purposes of practical utility, offer nothing attractive to the eye, and barely insure the comfort of their occupants. It had been furnished with the simple necessaries of life by the former owner of the land on which it stood, and came thus into the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, having been included in the original purchase of the estate.</p>
			<p>Immediately upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy’s arrival in the West, however, when this place became his head-quarters, he had endeavored to make it a comfortable summer residence for himself and his father-in-law, by sending thither from the nearest city those articles of luxurious living, in which it was most obviously deficient; and these being purchased for temporary use, and with little care and discretion, constituted, together with the rude specimens of furniture which had been found there, an incongruous mass of household utensils and appliances, which, thrown together in utter disregard of convenience or good taste, imparted to the rooms a most unsettled and desolate appearance.</p>
			<p>But the same quick eye and hand which, a year before, had been so prompt in relieving the dull uniformity of a superb city mansion, knew how to reduce this bewildering chaos to harmony and order; and, although Harry still persisted in playfully styling it a bivouac and an encampment, their dwelling soon assumed, under Mabel’s superintendence, all the essential characteristics of a home. It was true no one could be blind to the fact, that the rich and gaily-colored carpet of their only parlor contrasted painfully with the bare, plastered walls and smoke-stained ceiling; that the heavy brass and irons were but little in keeping with the rough, ill-painted chimney-piece and wide brick hearth; that the stuffed arm-chairs and sofa, which were among the imported articles, were strangely at variance with an old pine table and wooden clock, which were as indispensable as they were ugly; and that silver forks and damask napkins only served to make the rude cutlery and clumsy tin coffee-pot more conspicuous features in the breakfast service.</p>
			<p>Woman, however, has an art unknown to man, by which due prominence may be given to the attractive side of the domestic picture, while the reverse is atoned for or kept wholly out of sight; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and Harry were not the first who have felt the power of a cleanly swept hearth, a neat table-cover, a well-ordered meal, a tasteful work-basket, and a box of mignionette in the window, without being able to define the cause of their unwonted sense of comfort.</p>
			<p>Upon the unpacking of Mabel’s trunk, a treasure had come to light, which had awakened in her many a touching reminiscence and emotion, and which excited Alick to tears and Murray to an ecstasy of delight. It was Rosy’s picture of the little pilgrim, packed in a snug corner by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hope, and marked on the back in Lydia’s hand-writing, with Rosy’s dying message, “Give this to my dear Miss Mabel.” They hung it on that side of the plastered wall to which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s eyes were often turned in his half-absent fits of dejection, where it stood out from the cold white surface, as much alone and as highly prized as in Rosy’s humble room, and silently proclaimed those blessed truths of which Rosy’s voice and life had furnished the interpretation.</p>
			<p>It had been obvious, from the first moment of Mabel’s arrival, that nothing would so mortify and distress her father as to see her reduced to the performance of menial offices; and this feeling, which his whole manner conveyed, was expressed almost immediately in the decisive words, “Harry, we must look out at once for servants. James has done very well for us, with what assistance he has been able to obtain in the neighborhood; but the case is quite different now. Even if Mabel should only be here for a week or two, we must have female servants, if there are any such to be obtained, and make her as comfortable as possible.”</p>
			<p>The saving clause in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s remark was well introduced, for the difficulty of securing female help in a new country is proverbial; and, though Harry fully coincided with his father’s views, and was indefatigable in his efforts, he met with only partial success, and that not until he was nearly discouraged. At length, however, a young and inexperienced girl, daughter of a recent settler in the vicinity, consented to enter Mabel’s service, and through the latter’s perseverance in training both herself and her hand-maiden, some degree of system was introduced into the kitchen department, and there was at least the show of a waiting woman in the establishment.</p>
			<p>Of the trials, disappointments, and difficulties, which a young house-keeper endures during her novitiate, most women know something by experience, and most men by hearsay; while all will agree, that no small credit was due to the girl who bore her trials cheerfully, laughed over her disappointments, patiently contended with difficulties, and maintained, meanwhile, a happy contentment of spirit, which spread sunshine through the house, and even forbade her anxious parent to consider her an object of compassion.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan was frequently absent from home, on those excursions which had reference to his scheme of future wealth and aggrandizement, and, on his return, his mind was generally too much abstracted to admit of his making any observation upon his family circumstances, beyond that of the general health and welfare of the household. He accepted the arrangements which were made for his comfort, without seeming to trace them to their source, and sometimes came and went without communicating a single fact connected with his journeyings, or making a single inquiry concerning the events which had transpired in his absence. The roll of charts, descriptive of his landed property, was usually spread out before him, upon the table, and when not actually engaged in consulting it, he would restlessly pace the room; while, more than once, Mabel was startled by hearing his step in the night time, and, on hastily descending the stairs, discovered him, in night-cap and dressing-gown, poring over the engrossing maps, tracing out the course of the river, or the boundary line of his estates. “Go back to bed, my child,” he would say, looking up from his labors, but not removing his finger from the place which it marked; “I am sorry I disturbed you; I only wished to satisfy my mind upon a certain point.”</p>
			<p>“I thought you might be ill,” Mabel would perhaps remark; and he in his turn would answer, a little impatiently, “Ill? Oh, no, I am perfectly well,⁠—perfectly.”</p>
			<p>The autumn, however, was fast changing into winter, and the subject of a return to New York was as wholly dropped as if such a thing had never been contemplated. Time did not appear to hang heavily upon Harry’s hands; he was out almost constantly with his dog and gun, and his health and figure were becoming robust under the influence of this active life. Nor did Mabel’s high hopes suffer any diminution, nor her fears become in any degree excited, on his account, although his frequent and prolonged shooting excursions brought him into contact, not only with the reckless hunter and backwoodsman, but, also, with many a gay sporting-party from Canada and the Western cities, who were, at this season, finding recreation in the hunting grounds of the West. He invariably returned home laden with game, which was no trifling feature in their larder; and, by his thoughtfulness for Mabel’s comfort, by his anxiety to lighten her cares in providing for the wants of the family, and by the exercise of a discretion and good judgment which had never before characterized him, he gave evidence of his growth in manly purpose and true generosity of heart.</p>
			<p>Mabel’s social deprivations might seem one of the most striking trials of her lot. But although her father and brother were much from home, and the neighborhood offered few advantages, she found more than enough in her present situation to compensate for all she had lost by the exchange of a crowded city for a life on the open prairie.</p>
			<p>The children were her constant companions. Alick could not long be contented out of her sight, and the chivalrous devotion which had marked his demeanor on their journey suffered no diminution at its termination. He was her invariable attendant and fellow laborer, and under her sunny influence the best traits of his character were rapidly developing; while Murray, in the keen enjoyment of simple pleasures, was overcoming the false tastes and unreasonable temper which were due to flattery, and the injurious influences that hotel life is sure to exert upon a child.</p>
			<p>But there was still another source from which Mabel derived sweet and welcome companionship, learning in the exercise of a warm and tender friendship how much more precious is the intercourse with one true and congenial mind, than with hundreds of those chance acquaintances who are thoughtlessly termed friends.</p>
			<p>She was standing one day at the front window of her parlor, watching the boys who were at play outside, when her attention was attracted by a little, shaggy, white pony, approaching the house at a quick canter. As the village had been laid out with reference to that immense growth which it had not yet attained, and a wide open common intervened between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s residence and the opposite street, the figure of the rider, who, regardless of the beaten track, pursued a direct course over the rolling prairie ground, was strongly defined on the open space and against the clear blue sky, and was watched by Mabel with intense interest and curiosity. It was a young, slight, and delicate-looking girl, who, dressed in a light gray habit, with a straw hat, bound and tied with green ribbon, and her fair hair floating on the breeze, presented a novel and picturesque appearance. She rode with careless ease and grace, and seemed to guide and control her little steed by a species of magic, for as she drew near the house she suddenly threw the reins on its neck, checked it with a word, and springing lightly from its back, apparently bestowed no further thought upon the animal, which followed her for a few paces, then tossed its head, snuffed the air, and bounded to a little distance, where it stopped and quietly commenced grazing.</p>
			<p>Gathering her skirts lightly in her hand,⁠—they were not so long as to interfere materially with her walking,⁠—she came tripping up to the door, but did not appear to be in haste, for seeing the children, she paused in evident surprise, stooped down and stroked the head of Harry’s dog, with which they were playing, and asked them a few questions, to which, however, she failed to obtain satisfactory answers. Mabel was just considering whether she should go to meet this unexpected visitor, when, without the ceremony of a knock, the door was opened and she entered unannounced, with several letters and papers in her hand, which she was about to lay upon the table and retire; but seeing Mabel, she paused, blushed slightly, then with the simple confidence of one who has never known cause for more than momentary embarrassment, advanced and cordially extended her hand. “It is Miss Vaughan,” exclaimed she, with unaffected astonishment and pleasure. “But I did not know you had come. I had no idea you thought of coming. I am very glad to see you.”</p>
			<p>Mabel shook the young girl’s hand warmly, for her appearance was very prepossessing; she could not, however, disguise the curiosity she felt concerning her, and the little horsewoman ingenuously responded to it in the words⁠—“I am Helen Gracie, the clergyman’s daughter, the village letter carrier, my father’s curate, and your father’s earliest acquaintance in the place, and medical adviser, too, I may say, if you will not think me proud.”</p>
			<p>Many more were the titles to honor and to love which Helen might with equal truth, though not with equal modesty, have claimed; for this fair flower of the wilderness, this lily of the prairie, as she was rightly termed, was known and beloved for a circuit of twenty miles around, and the various offices she filled were as numerous as they were beneficent.</p>
			<p>It was enough for Mabel, however, that she recognized in her the gentle nurse who had ministered to her father’s wants, and earnestly pressing the little hand which had applied the healing balsam and prepared the wholesome nourishment for her wounded and invalid parent, she proceeded to thank her in no measured terms for the friendly and neighborly part she had played. She had heard her father speak frequently of Miss Gracie’s attentions, and Harry, too, had referred to her by name; but having pictured to herself some ancient and withered crone, laden with a huge bag of herbs, and prating of her skill, she could not sufficiently express her pleasure at this agreeable surprise.</p>
			<p>Helen, however, disclaimed all praise; she had merely recommended an application for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s sprain, which had fortunately proved effectual, and the dear old gentleman’s kindness had made it a pleasure to ride over and inquire after his health. She then apologized for her present intrusion, by saying that she had frequently been in the habit, during the summer, of calling and leaving the letters, on her way from the post-office to a neighboring settlement which she visited almost daily, and as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leroy were seldom at home, she usually came in and left them on the table. Mabel, charmed with her fresh and lady-like simplicity, begged that she would always thus dispense with ceremony; and, Helen having been persuaded to take a seat, the two girls were soon chatting together with a freedom which gave the promise of speedy intimacy and mutual happiness in each other’s society.</p>
			<p>There was no question which Mabel could ask concerning the country, or the neighborhood, to which Helen could not give a prompt and intelligent answer, and no advice or counsel which she required in her present circumstances, which her new friend was not competent to bestow; for Helen had been born in the West, and the greater part of her young life had been passed in this very locality, to which her father, a devoted minister of the gospel, had brought his only child in her infancy, and where, unbiassed by worldly prejudice, he had reared and educated her according to his own ideas of female loveliness and duty.</p>
			<p>“You have been a housekeeper ten years!” exclaimed Mabel, as Helen laughingly declared that her experience dated back to that remote period. Then, reviewing with a smile the sweet, infantile features which seemed to mock the assertion, she added, “No one would believe you such a veteran in the service; but I shall take you at your word, and rely on your advice in all domestic matters, as well as in the wider range of subjects we have been discussing. If you please, before you go,” for Helen was about to depart, “will you step into the kitchen, and tell me if Melissa’s bread is risen enough to put into the pans?”</p>
			<p>And Helen accepted the invitation with the same playful air with which it was given, and the bread was all the better for her suggestions.</p>
			<p>She then spoke her farewell, and the pony, obedient to its mistress’ call, came trotting up with the playful and waggish capers of a little dog. “Will you take a ride, sir?” said Helen to Murray, who stood attentively watching the animal’s motions.</p>
			<p>The courageous boy answered readily in the affirmative, and in an instant the lively girl had lifted him to the saddle, and was laughing merrily at his delight, as she led the docile pony round in a wide circle; then helping him to alight, she sprung into his place, waved her hand gaily to Mabel, who stood watching them in the doorway, and cantered off over the prairie in an opposite direction to that from which she had come.</p>
			<p>A moment after Harry crossed the bridge, and emerging from the thicket which bordered the river, joined Mabel on the doorstep, while the figure of Helen was still in sight, though gradually lessening in the distance.</p>
			<p>“I do believe,” exclaimed he, “you have had a visit from that little desert sprite. This is the third time I have come up just in season to see her beat a retreat, and never yet have I had a glimpse of her face, though father speaks of her so familiarly that she can not be utterly a myth.”</p>
			<p>“Harry,” said Mabel with enthusiasm, “she is the dearest little creature in the world.”</p>
			<p>“I have had a suspicion of the fact,” replied Harry, “but that is all. I invariably catch sight of her riding off as she is now, with her curls floating behind her, and almost think she sees me coming and makes her escape on the instant.”</p>
			<p>“She lives in the cottage yonder; you can see the smoke from the chimney,” said Mabel. “We are the best of friends already, and I have promised to return her visit soon; you must go with me.”</p>
			<p>Harry did so, not unwillingly; and as time passed on and the intimacy between the families continued to ripen, Mabel’s declaration and his suspicions regarding their new friend seemed destined to become confirmed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
