<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 36</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Men of thought! be up and stirring</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Night and day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sow the seed, withdraw the curtain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Clear the way!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men of action, aid and cheer them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As ye may!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s a midnight blackness changing</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into grey;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men of thought and action,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Clear the way!”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The village in which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s homestead was located was fortunate in having been started (to use a familiar expression) by a number of intelligent and enterprising men, who had, through their praiseworthy exertions, given the place an established character and a prominence among the thriving towns of the country. Beside churches of three different denominations, it now boasted a neat school-house, an extensive flour-mill, and a handsome block of stores, the upper story of which constituted a convenient and capacious town-hall, which was first made use of for the purpose of public speaking on the night of Percival’s address. This latter circumstance, together with the wide-spread popularity of the young orator, caused the occasion to be one of universal interest, and at an early hour the spacious room was thronged by an eager and attentive audience. A stout and honest trader, a supervisor of the of the town, occupied a seat on the platform at the left of that intended for the speaker; and in a similar place of honor on the right sat <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, who, as the oldest citizen, the largest land-owner, and, above all, the perfect type of a grave, respectable gentleman, invariably received from his fellow-townsmen similar voluntary marks of distinction and deference.</p>
			<p>The hour appointed for the address was just at hand. No orator had yet made his appearance, and a murmur of disappointment and inquiry was beginning to circulate through the crowd, when the tall and commanding form of Percival issued from its midst. With a perfectly calm, unruffled air he ascended the platform, shook hands with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and the supervisor, and looking round upon his audience with a smile of approbation, sat down and exchanged a few words with the gentlemen on either side of him. Then, observing that the hand of the clock pointed exactly the time agreed upon, he signified by a gesture his readiness to commence, and the sturdy trader, in fulfilment of his functions, rose and introduced him to the audience, who having in the meantime scanned his countenance and proportions, and, as American citizens are wont to do, established their individual opinions of his merits, greeted him with a unanimous and unqualified round of applause.</p>
			<p>It was at this moment that Mabel and her nephews, somewhat heated and out of breath from their hasty meal and rapid walk, entered the gallery, which, although the entire assembly was freely interspersed with females, had been especially reserved for ladies.</p>
			<p>“There’s Miss Vaughan and her boys,” said a cousin of Melissa, wife to the innkeeper, addressing herself to two young girls whom Mabel was in the habit of instructing in the Sabbath School. “Move up, Elizy. Can’t you make a little room, Euphemy? I want to offer her this seat here in front. La, now! don’t she look splendid? If the speaker could only catch sight of her, wouldn’t he be inspired?” And standing up and gesticulating violently to Alick, she contrived to let him understand that his aunt could be accommodated beside her, to which place Mabel was with some difficulty piloted; and after thanking the obliging landlady and expressing a hope that she should not incommode any one, she seated herself, and as the din of applause subsided, her eye for the first time sought the platform.</p>
			<p>Had the young man indeed depended on Mabel for his inspiration, he could scarcely have bestowed on her a more earnest look than that which met her gaze, as at this moment he lifted his face and fixed his full blue eye upon her. As she encountered that expressive glance, her face, neck, and brow were suffused with crimson; and when next it was turned upon his audience, she listened with straining ear and breath suspended, as if the fate of nations hung upon his first word.</p>
			<p>“Aunt Mabel,” exclaimed Murray, in an eager, excited whisper, at the same time leaning forward from a seat behind her and striving to attract her attention, “It is, yes, it is our hunter⁠—our prairie friend⁠—our fellow-traveller!”</p>
			<p>“Hush!” cried Alick, in an earnest, dissuasive tone; his quicker sensibilities revealing to him at a glance the emotions which were depicted in Mabel’s countenance; “There is no need to tell her that; she sees, she knows.”</p>
			<p>There was indeed no mistaking the identity of the two individuals, for except that the wide-awake hat was laid aside and the hunting-suit exchanged for one of plain black cloth, the Percival who stood before them now, was the Bayard who had bade them farewell less than half an hour ago.</p>
			<p>The silence that succeeded the first burst of enthusiastic welcome which had greeted the speaker was so intense and profound, that even the warning words of Alick sank to the faintest whisper, lest they might disturb the motionless expectancy which prevailed through the assembly, as Percival, in a clear and melodious voice, opened his address by a simple statement of the causes and motives for his presenting himself before them.</p>
			<p>His calm but earnest manner, his language, at once plain, forcible, and marked by perfect truth, and, perhaps, more than all, his commanding presence, and an eye which seemed to address its appeal to each individual heart, had the effect of at once concentrating and riveting the attention of an audience composed, for the most part, of plain and unpretending, but intelligent and self-respecting men. Accustomed to the noisy rant and bombastic parade of professed caucus oratory, and manfully steeled against the wily sophistry and noisy partizanship of the greedy aspirants after popular favor, they were all the more ready to give a willing and impartial hearing to one who, unshackled by the excitement of political ambition, made no appeal to their prejudices or their passions, but addressed himself, and recommended his cause, to that sound reason and enlightened conscience on which they prided themselves as free men and worthy citizens. Thus, as he stated his argument in plain, unvarnished terms, many a corroborating and assenting nod, on the part of the audience, proclaimed their conviction of its truth. As he announced the conclusion to which he himself had been led, a murmur of approbation seemed to intimate that each mind acknowledged him as its fit interpreter; and when, finally, with that pathos and eloquence which have their source in the deep emotions of a true and noble nature, he sought to rouse them, and bid them listen to the solemn call of duty, the heart of the multitude throbbed responsively, like the heart of one man.</p>
			<p>No studied oratory, no hollow declamation, could thus have fired with generous warmth that rude, but candid and earnest assemblage. The secret of the speaker’s power lay in his sincerity;⁠—in the fact that the cause which he came to proclaim had stirred and roused his own spirit like a trumpet-call. He had hitherto voted at the polls, and expressed his political views, as a simple, conscientious discharge of manly duty; but, busy at home, and seeking nothing from abroad, he had wisely forborne to put himself forward as a gladiator in party strife. The case, however, was changed now. A great issue had arisen and a great crisis was at hand⁠—an issue between injustice and oppression on one side, and the law of right and humanity on the other. The crisis involved a country’s prosperity and a nation’s honor. Therefore a true man (and such was Bayard Percival) could not remain a silent and inactive spectator, in a scene where he was nobly fitted to bear a part. He knew his power and felt his responsibility. His power was that of an honest man; his responsibility, that of a Christian. Had it been otherwise, he might have spoken to closed ears and failed to convince a single heart. But a character as free from wild fanaticism on the one hand, as from cold conservatism on the other, had given him the people’s confidence; while the purity of his motives and aims inspired him with a wisdom and a power which caused his words to be received as little less than oracles.</p>
			<p>“Had one come among you,” exclaimed he, “who, possessed of the spirit of misrule, prompted by one-sided and misdirected zeal, or excited by a blind enthusiasm, should bid you set at defiance every claim but that which he came to advocate, and rush into indiscriminate warfare with the enemy against whom all his passions were inflamed, I would simply charge you to beware, lest, while seeking by desperate and unsanctified means to promote the welfare of one brotherhood of men, you trampled under foot the rights, the property, and the lives of another, which should be to you equally dear and sacred.</p>
			<p>“But, on the other hand, I would with equal fervor bid you beware of that sluggishness of the soul, that fatal indifference to truth and humanity, to which our very prosperity renders us prone, and would charge you as freemen, as citizens, and as Christians, to maintain inviolate the principles which you profess, and stand ever as sentinels on the watch-tower reared for the protection of civil liberty and the promotion of individual freedom. We may not at once extirpate the poison which has distilled itself into some portion of our body politic; but we can at least guard the members which are free from its subtle influence, and preserve pure and unsullied those fresh fountains of strength which are at length destined to infuse new health and vigor throughout the length and breadth of the Republic.”</p>
			<p>Then, changing his tone from that of earnest appeal to one of simple, descriptive power, he directed the thoughts and attention of his audience to that beautiful sister soil, then beginning to be the subject of national legislation, and painted, with all the warmth of the enthusiastic traveller, and all the simplicity and force of the practical husbandman, the beauty, the wealth, and the resources of that favored land. His countenance and words bore the impress of perfect truth, as, in an unvarnished narrative of facts, he described the richness of her virgin soil, and the nature and extent of the productions it was capable of yielding. His eye glowed with the animation of the sportsman, and the inspiration of the poetic soul, as he dwelt on the grandeur of those primeval forests in which he had hunted, and roamed, and meditated, his broad chest seemed to expand and his form to rear itself to increased height, as he expatiated on the generations of noble men and women which such a land was capable of inspiring to high thoughts and generous deeds. And when, finally, having stirred the hearts of the assembly by his faithful representation of what this fair domain might, at no distant period, become, he commended her to their brotherly love, all were not only ready, but eager to extend the right hand of fellowship to their young and promising neighbor.</p>
			<p>But there was another and darker side to the picture, and this he now hastened to set before them in all its sad deformity and gloom. He employed no fanatical abuse or tirade for the furtherance of his purpose, but with calm, prophetic warning, pointed to the blight already hovering in the air, the cloud already darkening in the distance and threatening to overshadow and destroy the fair harvest of men’s hopes. “To what,” asked he, “are you indebted for your own unexampled prosperity? is it not to the equality of human rights, the dignity which attends free and honest labor, the universal education of your children and the spread of Gospel truth? And shall any or all of these be denied to our sister territory? I charge you, as those who have a voice in this great decision, to answer the solemn question⁠—shall that fatal institution be suffered to settle down upon the land, which dooms one race to slavery and dishonor and another to stagnation and decay? Shall that rich soil become the ground of the task-master,⁠—those noble woods the retreat of the fugitive? Shall progress be checked, and the voice of truth be silenced, and man’s better nature crushed? Forbid it, Heaven! Forbid it, ye who by word, by look, by honest vote, may command one breath of influence and bear a freeman’s part in averting so fearful a catastrophe! Let it not be said that the poison has penetrated to the seat of life, and that here, in the heart of our free and enlightened State, there are traitors to the cause of truth. Let us at least, a united and determined band, present our closed ranks against the inroads of perfidious counsels, and let the district which we serve be foremost in proclaiming that⁠—Nebraska shall be free.”</p>
			<p>At this period in Percival’s address, the audience, who had more than once expressed their enthusiasm by unqualified applause, rose simultaneously from their seats, and amid the waving of hands, hats and handkerchiefs, caught up and echoed by common consent his closing words⁠—“Nebraska shall be free.”</p>
			<p>Great as was the clamor, however, it subsided almost instantly, as looking around him with unmoved countenance he continued in a calm, earnest tone. “I have not come hither my friends, so much to excite, as to convince you⁠—not merely to rouse your generous patriotism, but to urge upon you now, and in view of similar contingencies, that fair, firm and consistent action by which alone you can lend your aid to the security and extension of the cause of freedom. It is because a crisis has arisen, to which the nation at large seems strangely indifferent, and because such occasions must from time to time occur so long as we are a people divided upon one great topic, that I have endeavored to awaken you to the importance of the event; for while I may speak and you may honor me by a hearing, responsibility and action belong to us all alike. As good men and true, let us see to it then that in our hearts and in our homes, in the every-day walks of life, and at the polls, we cherish and maintain those high and sacred principles which policy, reason, and an enlightened Christianity, alike approve.” Then, with the solemnity and fervor of one whose daily walk with God kept him ever mindful of the Sacred Presence, he commended the assembly to the guidance and direction of Him in whose hands all men are but as instruments, and the address was ended.</p>
			<p>From the commencement of the lecture to the moment when applause was at its height, the impulsive and excitable disposition of Murray had exhibited itself in the animation of his countenance, the eagerness of his gestures, and the vehemence of his cheers; Alick, in the meantime, remaining thoughtful, quiet and attentive, manifesting to those around him no other sign of emotion than that conveyed by the intense earnestness with which his eye was fixed upon the speaker. The most ardent sensibilities, however, are seldom those which appear on the surface, and the soul of the elder boy was none the less stirred, that it found no outward expression save in a single movement, which appealed to but one person present, and that perhaps the only one in the throng capable of appreciating his delicately organized and susceptible nature. At that crisis in the feelings of the assembly when with one accord they rose and joined in common acclamation, the youth might have been observed to leave his seat, a little in the rear of Mabel, and darting down the aisle which divided the gallery, ensconce himself on the lowest step directly beside his young aunt, who turned, met the earnest look which he fixed upon her face, responded to it with an answering smile, clasped his extended hand, and the boy feeling himself to be understood by the only being whose sympathy and approbation he craved, was satisfied and content; nor did he once again change his position or remove his eye from that of Percival until the close of the oration.</p>
			<p>We may not probe the reflections which coursed through the mind of the boy, far less can we follow all the windings of that train of thought and emotion which partially revealed itself in the face of Mabel, as she, too, watched the expression of Percival’s countenance, and drank in the inspiration of his words. For the first half-hour succeeding her entrance she was wholly engrossed by the tumultuous and agitating thoughts which attended her recognition of the speaker. Already, though known to her only by the report of his manly virtues, she had imaged him to herself as the impersonation of all that was truly noble, disinterested, and heroic; and now, in addition to every other claim which he possessed to her esteem, respect, and gratitude, he had suddenly proved to be identical with the man who, years before, in the hour of her bitter agony and humiliation, had won for himself a lasting place in her memory and her prayers, and who once more, on this very day, had by his zealous efforts in her behalf confirmed her sense of deep and personal obligation. No wonder then, that from the moment when the harmonious tones of his voice fell upon her ear, confirming, as it were, the evidence of her other senses, she was for a while unconscious of the subject of his discourse, and realized only his individual presence.</p>
			<p>She could not long, however, continue indifferent to the topic which evidently, for the time, engrossed all the powers of his master mind, and reacted proportionately upon his audience. Her kindling eye and cheek soon gave evidence of the intelligence with which she grasped the ideas, and the fulness with which she shared the enthusiasm of the speaker; the tear which now and then trembled on her eyelid, was significant of the sensibility awakened by the pathos which marked some portions of his appeal, and when, finally, the Christian orator commended them all to the keeping of their common Father, her face was expressive of the fervent aspirations of the uplifted soul.</p>
			<p>The heart that has been stirred to its utmost depths by the power of an eloquent and truthful tongue, shrinks almost with a sense of pain from those common-place questionings and rejoinders which disturb an elevated train of thought, and grate harshly upon the refined taste. Thus, the impulse which led the shy and reserved Alick to exclaim in a whisper to Mabel, as soon as the address drew to a termination, “Let us try and get out before the crowd, Auntie,” met with a corresponding prompting on her part; but finding that the suggestion could not be carried into effect without indecorous haste, and the possibility of giving offence, she made the best of her situation, suffered herself to be carried along with the rest of the throng, and responded good-naturedly to the various comments and criticisms upon the orator and the oration which saluted her on every side. Murray, meanwhile, acting as their pilot, made himself, as he never failed to do, universally popular by his boyish gallantry to the farmers’ wives, his rattling and jocose conversation with sturdy and rough-looking men, and his droll and mischievous pranks with little children, and boys of his own age, preserving, at the same time, a spice of aristocratic dignity which characterised him, and so marshalling his aunt and brother through the thickest of the press, that to their astonishment they found themselves among the earliest to leave the building.</p>
			<p>“Isn’t he a splendid fellow, Aunt Mabel?” exclaimed Murray, as they hastened in the direction of home. “Didn’t you feel proud of him? I did. Wasn’t it grand to think our prairie friend turned out, after all, to be the orator of the evening?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, very,” replied Mabel, in an absent way; but Murray, too much excited to need further encouragement, rattled on for some time in a similar strain, and closed by saying in a tone of confidence, “Al liked it, I know, because he didn’t say a word; he never does when he’s pleased; but,” added the boy, who had now learned to love and appreciate his brother, “he’ll prove it to us one of these days, I expect, in a way that speaks louder than words.”</p>
			<p>“Alick will not forget it very soon, shall you, Alick?” said Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Nobody who heard it will ever forget it,” said Alick.</p>
			<p>“Aunt Mabel,” cried Murray, “did you see how interested grand-father was?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Murray, he looked ten years younger than usual to-night.”</p>
			<p>“And he will bring <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival home with him, wont he? I saw him shaking hands with him after the lecture.”</p>
			<p>Mabel had no doubt of it, as their uncle Harry had assured her that his friend brought a note of introduction to her father.</p>
			<p>“Well here we are,” cried Murray, as he threw open the house door. “Aunt Sabiah talks about coincidences. We have got one to tell her now that will make her open her eyes.”</p>
			<p>“My sister, Miss Vaughan⁠—my daughter⁠—my grandsons,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, with ceremonious gravity, as about half an hour later he ushered Percival into the parlor, and introduced him to his family.</p>
			<p>Miss Sabiah made her usual stiff courtesy, but the young people, to the no small astonishment of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, came forward, almost before the words had left his lips, and shook hands with their guest, not with the air of those who are making a new acquaintance, but with the prompt cordiality with which one welcomes a familiar friend; while the smiles which were interchanged, and the mutual congratulations and good understanding which succeeded, proved them to have previous knowledge of one another.</p>
			<p>“You perceive, Sir, that I am not a stranger to your family,” said Percival. “I had the pleasure of travelling in company with them, this afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“And we,” said Mabel, “in our anxiety to do honor to our expected guest, suffered him to walk nearly a dozen miles over the prairie. We could not have taken advantage of your kindness with a quiet conscience, if we had known the effort you would be called upon to make this evening.”</p>
			<p>“I assure you, that neither walking nor public speaking are an effort to me,” said Percival. “I have accustomed myself, in the superintendence of my farm, to twice the amount of exercise I have had to-day, and, perhaps, the same cause has insured me healthy lungs. I only hope that yourself and my young friends here feel as little sense of fatigue as I do.”</p>
			<p>They all disclaimed any weariness from their journey; and then, to relieve <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s perplexity, Percival gave an outline of their little adventure, treating the matter lightly, however, and claiming no merit for the essential aid he had rendered.</p>
			<p>As it appeared, upon inquiry, that he had had no opportunity for refreshment of any sort since he halted at a village tavern, a little before mid-day, Mabel hastened from the room, “on hospitable thought intent,” and while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival engaged her father upon the subject of agriculture, and especially Harry’s successful farming, in which the old gentleman had never before appeared to take the slightest interest, she assisted Melissa in spreading a table and preparing an inviting repast. All were soon gathered round the neat and plentiful board, at which Mabel presided with as much grace and dignity as if she had held the seat of honor in her father’s New York mansion, with Robert, the well-trained waiter, standing behind her chair. Aunt Sabiah, who had long since resigned all responsible offices, occupied a seat at her niece’s right hand, and, as she only joined the rest for sociability’s sake, kept on with her knitting⁠—that favorite employment which she now no longer pursued from habit merely, since Alick, Murray, and even Harry, despite his former raillery, had long since found a way to give shape to the warm stockings, for which they were indebted to her industry. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, contrary to his usual habits, sipped a cup of chocolate, while Percival and the boys (boys are always hungry) did justice to the cold ham, bread, and tarts. The appetites of all were fully satisfied, however, and still they lingered at the table. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, ordinarily silent and reserved, was roused to animation and interest, as he conversed with Percival on the great events of the day. Sabiah forgot her shyness, and the drowsiness which usually overtook her at intervals was effectually dispersed, as their young guest illustrated the subjects under discussion by many a sparkling anecdote or striking incident. The boys were encouraged to contribute their share to the social interchange of thought; and Mabel’s opinions and feelings were deferred to with that consideration which highminded men are ever ready to pay to intelligent women. Thus midnight found them still enjoying each other’s society, and it was not until the loud striking clock reminded them of the hour, that, with mutual expressions of surprise at its being so late, the little party separated for the night.</p>
			<p>“Good morning, Auntie,” cried Murray, as, the next day soon after sunrise, he called to her from outside the pantry, adjoining the kitchen, where she was busy in making some preparation for breakfast; and, as he spoke, the affectionate, thoughtless boy flung open the blinds and disclosed the figure of Mabel standing just within the open window moulding some biscuit with the cover of the dredging-box which she held in her hand.</p>
			<p>His salutation was responded to with heartiness and good humor, nor did the young housewife blush, or seem in the least disconcerted, upon perceiving their guest, who, dressed in his hunting suit, and with rifle on his shoulder, was leaving the house with the boys, and who, like them, paused to inquire after her health and speak of the beauty of the morning.</p>
			<p>And why should she blush? On the contrary, she had reason to be proud of the picture which the sunshine revealed, as it streamed through the apartment. The spotless shelves, with their glittering rows of pans, the almost polished floor, the exquisite order and neatness of all the domestic paraphernalia, were only equalled by the good taste and harmony observable in the person of the fair mistress of the establishment, who, attired in a simple lilac print (none the less becoming to her faultless figure because her own hands had made it), with a snowy collar, and smooth, glossy hair, stood radiant with the beauty of the girl, and serene with the chastened benignity of womanhood.</p>
			<p>“We have heard some wild ducks in the direction of the river,” said Percival, “and are going to have a shot at them.”</p>
			<p>“I shall come home with a proof of my skill; see if I don’t, Aunt Mabel!” cried Murray, running forward and gaily tossing his cap in the air.</p>
			<p>Percival and Alick followed, laughing at Murray’s confidence and zeal. Mabel wished them success, and stood looking after them a moment, her rosy-tipped fingers, slightly besprinkled with flour, resting meanwhile on the moulding board; then closing the blinds, without, however, shutting out from the mind’s eye the image of that manly form and open countenance which carried with them a cheerful and magical influence, she quietly resumed her occupation. After delivering the pan of biscuit to Melissa’s charge, and leaving to her, also, the cooking of Bayard’s prairie fowl, in the serving of which she was an adept, Mabel joined her aunt in the parlor, and had not yet laid down the Bible, from which she had, by Sabiah’s request, been reading a chapter aloud, when the sportsmen returned from their excursion to the river-side.</p>
			<p>“Ah, you have been fortunate, Murray!” said she, as she observed a pair of silver-breasted ducks, which the latter had thrown down upon the grass.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the boy, in a slightly disappointed tone, “but Alick shot them.”</p>
			<p>“Murray spoke just before he fired,” said Percival, “and startled them so that they rose; then Alick fired the other barrel and shot them on the wing.”</p>
			<p>Mabel looked meaningly at Murray and laughed.</p>
			<p>“I know,” said Murray, good-naturedly. “I thought of it myself; it is just as you always say, Auntie; I do the boasting and Al carries away the prize.”</p>
			<p>“Must you leave us so early?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, in a tone of positive regret, as immediately after breakfast Bayard’s horse was brought to the door.</p>
			<p>“I fear I must, sir,” replied Percival, turning away from Rosy’s picture, at which he had been gazing attentively; “a similar duty to that which brought me here last night summons me to-day to a distance of some forty miles; but I hope at some future time to have the privilege of enjoying and returning your hospitality.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, seeming for the first time to realize that his present home could be rendered attractive, pressed upon Bayard his desire to welcome him there as often as might be, and still further astonished his family by declaring that he was soon going to see Harry, and would take the same opportunity of paying <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival a visit.</p>
			<p>Mabel was standing on the door-step when Bayard came to bid her farewell. He had shaken hands with Sabiah in the inner room. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and the boys had walked down to the roadside, where James was attaching the saddlebags to the saddle. For the first time, therefore, she saw him apart from the rest of the household. She gave him a few last messages for his mother; then, as he lingered, evidently loth to depart, she said in a hesitating, tremulous voice, “It is now more than six years, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Percival, since you did me a kindness which few would have attempted, and which few could have done. I have never thanked you; I never can,⁠—but I trust you believe that I can never forget it.”</p>
			<p>“Miss Vaughan,” said he, “I did only what common humanity demanded of one who had the soul of a man; it has been left for you to teach me the higher and holier lesson of what may be accomplished by a woman. Your brother makes no secret, with his friends, at least, of the priceless blessings which he owes to a sister’s love.”</p>
			<p>“Harry has an appreciating disposition,” said Mabel, “and his good heart makes him grateful for the affection and kindness which he always feels to be beyond his merits. The events of that night, which are so fixed in my memory, have happily passed from his, but of your consistent friendship in later years he can never say enough.”</p>
			<p>“It is a friendship which is invaluable to me,” said Percival. “Harry is a noble fellow,⁠—worthy of the sister who has made him what he is. I am most proud and happy to have met you again, Miss Vaughan.” He paused, seemed anxious to add something more,⁠—hesitated, and then, with an embarrassment foreign to his usual manner, bade her an abrupt farewell.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan and the boys, after seeing him ride off, walked slowly back to the house, and the ordinary events of their daily life succeeded. But, although Percival had been their guest for one night only, his presence and influence had left no ordinary impression upon every individual of the family, and it was long before any of them could cease to be conscious of the void which his departure had created in their circle.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
