<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Oh, when she’s angry, she is keen and shrewd!</span>
						<span>She was a vixen when she went to school,</span>
						<span>And though she be but little, she is fierce.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Shakspeare.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>As Mabel, after parting with Harry, ascended the wide staircase leading in the direction of her sister’s rooms, she heard a loud noise, as if some one were striking the floor above with a heavy stick. In a moment more a little figure appeared in sight, riding upon a stout cane. He was galloping, in imitation of the motions of a horse, and at every step the cane rattled upon the floor behind him. At the same time he was shouting to the imaginary steed in a voice which at least bespoke healthy lungs. He was a beautiful child, with long curls of fair hair hanging upon his shoulders, and his dress, though disordered and somewhat slovenly, was gay and fanciful in the extreme. That he was wholly unmanageable was evident from the fact that he paid no attention to the voice of a young, tired-looking girl, who was following and vainly calling upon him to stop. Just as Mabel reached the top of the staircase, the girl overtook the child, and attempted, with a restraining arm, to check him in his course. At this moment, and when the long passage-way was ringing with the sudden and violent cries of the now angry and excited boy, a door opened from a neighboring room and a gentleman exclaimed, in a severe tone, “Really, if you cannot keep that child still, I must complain to the landlord,⁠—my wife is very ill, and that boy has been troubling us all the morning.” The poor girl looked in despair, especially as the little horseman had, in the meantime, escaped from her grasp, and was continuing his sport, regardless of the impatient voice and threatening manner in which the gentleman now called to him, in the words⁠—“Stop, sir!”</p>
			<p>In the meantime, Mabel, half-smiling at the scene, kept on her way towards her sister’s apartments, which were in an opposite direction, and passing the spacious parlor and bedroom, paused at the door of a chamber beyond, which she knew to be used as a nursery. She knocked slightly, but perceiving at the same moment that the door was ajar, opened it and went in. Directly opposite to her, seated at a high table, and with his feet dangling from his chair, was one of the young gentlemen whom she had come to seek. He could not have been more than eight years of age, but as he sat with his forehead resting on both hands, and his eyes fixed upon a book, there was in his stooping attitude, and the grave, fixed expression of his face, something which it was painful and unnatural to witness in so young a child. There was but little life or animation in his features; his complexion was dark and sallow, and his thin fingers were thrust through his long hair in such a manner that it fell over them in distinct and heavy locks, shadowing and nearly concealing his otherwise high and open brow. He did not move or change his position as Mabel entered, but glancing at her from beneath his hand with a wholly indifferent air, said, abruptly, “Mother’s gone out;” and then kept on with his reading.</p>
			<p>Before Mabel had time to reply, she was roughly thrust aside by the same little urchin whom she had seen in the entry, and who now rushed by her into the room, still riding on the stick, with which he made the circuit of the apartment two or three times, drawing in his chin, and opening and shutting his mouth, as if in the act of champing a bit. At length, as he drew near the table of the young student, who had not hitherto bestowed on him the least notice, he commenced a series of caracoles, and then, bobbing his head, as if irritated by the pressure of a tight rein, contrived to hit the book, which had been propped in an upright position on the table, and succeeded in throwing it on the floor. His brother, for both were in truth <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s children, received this bit of pleasantry with a glow of sullen anger, and stretching forth his foot from beneath the table, bestowed a sudden kick on the unruly author of the mischief. Mabel, still standing near the door, was an attentive witness of the whole proceeding. Alick, the bestower of the reprimand, perfectly aware that he was observed, cast upon her a half-mortified, half-defiant look, which seemed to say, “you saw! I don’t care if you did;” and then stooping down, he picked up his book and replaced it in precisely the same position which it had occupied before.</p>
			<p>He appeared, meanwhile, quite indifferent to the cries of the younger child, who, although in reality but little hurt by his brother’s blow, had thrown himself upon the floor, and was screaming and sobbing with all his might.</p>
			<p>Shocked at Alick’s rudeness, and repelled by the sullen expression of his face, Mabel’s sympathies were now wholly with the younger boy, who, in spite of his wilful and riotous behavior, seemed the more amiable of the two. She took him, therefore, upon her knee, soothed his cries, and, with the view of relieving the astonishment of the children’s attendant, who looked at her with surprise, made haste to announce her relationship. As she said, “I am your Aunt Mabel,” Alick looked up quickly from his book, gave her an earnest and searching glance, and then looked down as before. Murray, however, the other, appeared careless and unconcerned on this point, but submitted to her caresses, allowed himself to be comforted, and upon being permitted to search her pockets for the confectionary which she informed him was to be found there, quite forgot his past injuries, and became sunshiny and good humored.</p>
			<p>Mabel could not win from him, however, any recognition of her claims upon his love. He received her attentions and favors as a part of the homage due to a petted child, but shook his head when she asked him if he did not remember the many kisses Aunt Mabel had sent him in her letters to mamma, and the pretty toys which came in a box at Christmas. Convinced by his manner, that her name awakened no emotion of interest in the boy, and failing to perceive the expression of eager scrutiny with which Alick had for an instant regarded her, she felt a momentary pang of disappointment, in the thought that the children she had been so impatient to see, looked upon her as a stranger. But her loving nature would not permit her to be easily repulsed, and she resolved that since it rested wholly with herself to awaken the affection of her little nephews, no pains should be wanting on her part. So she exerted herself most sedulously for the entertainment of the younger boy, at the same time endeavoring to excite the attention of his silent brother. During the half hour that Murray sat upon her knee, the increasing interest with which he gazed into the face of his beautiful young relative, and the eagerness with which he listened to her playful and lively words, were sufficient evidence of the success which seldom failed to attend her efforts to engage the ear and win the heart of childhood. She more than once turned from him to address a remark to Alick, but he either gave her no reply or answered in such a sulky tone, that she was at length deterred from any attempt to become better acquainted with him.</p>
			<p>In the meantime, there was still another in the room who, although unnoticed herself, watched Mabel with no small degree of admiration and curiosity. This was the young girl who had the charge of the children, and whose weary-looking face had excited Mabel’s compassion as she came up the stairs. Her’s was indeed a hard task,⁠—a task which under the most favorable circumstances, might have worn upon the strength and spirits of so young a girl, and which was rendered doubly difficult, by reason of her having in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s employ several different parties to please, any one of which it was impossible to satisfy. Moreover, she had been delicately brought up, and her present employment was new and irksome to her.</p>
			<p>To have the restless Murray quiet and amused for one half hour, to be spared the necessity of furnishing diversion for him, and to be permitted to sit by and listen to the pleasant words and lively sallies which were no less entertaining to herself than to her little charge, was a pleasure the more keenly appreciated because so rarely enjoyed; and Mabel little knew with what a smile of satisfaction she was watched by another pair of eyes, beside those which beamed brightly upon her from the face of the child. At length a sudden gust of wind, and heavy rain drops pattering against the window, gave Mabel the first intimation that the storm which was threatening when she left home, had now commenced with great severity. Imprisoned as she thus was, in the hotel, and fearful lest her aunt would be anxious at her continued absence, she was revolving in her mind the possibility of sending a messenger to her father’s house, when she recognized in the neighboring passage-way the voice of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, and the loud laugh of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker. At once conjecturing that the storm had hastened their return, she hurried to meet her sister, in hopes that she might be in season to detain the carriage. But she was too late; the coachman had already driven off. Louise gaily reproached her, however, for desiring to run away the moment she had reached home. “To whom, pray, was your visit intended?” asked she.</p>
			<p>“To the children,” replied Mabel. “I have seen them at last.”</p>
			<p>“And how do you like them? Isn’t my precious Murray a darling little pet? and as for Alick⁠—I hope he was in his usual good humor?”</p>
			<p>Her tone was sincere when she spoke of Murray, but she turned to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker with a short laugh, as she uttered the latter clause, and both the laugh and the tone of her voice betrayed that the remark was made in irony.</p>
			<p>Mabel understood the insinuation and, while she wondered that her sister could speak lightly on so grave a matter as the bad temper of her own child, she said to herself,⁠—“I have seen him then in his usual mood;⁠—what a very disagreeable boy he must be!”</p>
			<p>They now bade <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker good-morning, and Louise led the way to her own apartments, Mabel following her, at the same time requesting that some one might be sent to summon the carriage, as, on her aunt’s account, she felt the importance of returning home at once.</p>
			<p>But she found it impossible to resist the pressing and graceful manner in which Louise insisted that she should stay, at least until after lunch, assuring her that it was the height of folly to make herself such a slave to the whims and fears of the old lady, who, she plainly saw, was disposed to play the tyrant; and Mabel, too easily yielding to her sister’s persuasions, consented to remain. As they entered the drawing-room, Murray came bounding to meet his mother, who took him in her arms, lavished upon him many an endearing and flattering epithet, and throwing herself upon the sofa, in an affected and languishing attitude, permitted the indulged child to trample at will upon her rich dress, and play with the artificial roses that adorned her bonnet.</p>
			<p>As Mabel looked at them, she thought she had never seen a more interesting picture of maternal loveliness, and child-like beauty; but the scene thus presented was as short-lived as the effect was striking; for Louise’s vanity, both on her own account, and that of her child, being quite satisfied by this little display of tenderness, she could not long restrain the impatience and irritability which rendered such companionship irksome, and after a few moments, the rash and wilful hand of the boy having assailed the delicate lace of her collar, she thrust it hastily aside, and abruptly lifted him from the sofa to the floor. As she did so, he succeeded in snatching a rich ermine mantle from her shoulders, and retreated to the other end of the room, dragging the delicate white fur behind him on the carpet.</p>
			<p>Louise, who was expatiating to Mabel upon the attractions of a dramatic performance to take place that evening at the house of one of the leaders of fashion, seemed at first quite unconscious of this feat on the part of the child; but in a moment more she rose suddenly from her seat, and still continuing in an earnest strain of conversation with Mabel, took a few steps towards Murray, who was roughly playing with his prize, and snatching one end of the mantle, which lay stretched upon the carpet, endeavored to wrest it from his grasp. Her manner was resolute, but the boy was nothing daunted. He clung to his new toy, and by a sudden effort, extricating it from his mother’s hands, gathered it in his arms, and escaped to the opposite corner, casting over his shoulder a triumphant glance at his baffled parent. So far from following up the pursuit, however, or uttering a word of reprimand, she appeared rather to glory in the rebellious spirit of the child; her only comment upon the failure of her attempt consisting in a smile of amusement at the success with which he had asserted his independence of control. Nor did the risk of injury to the mantle further engage her thoughts, but, passively yielding to the little conqueror, she resumed her seat, and continued the scarcely interrupted strain of her discourse upon the music, dresses, and decorations of the evening’s entertainment.</p>
			<p>Mabel, while engaging with animation upon the subject of pleasures which had for her all the zest of novelty, scarcely gave a thought to this little contest between parent and child, save as she considered it a proof of that sweet softness, and amiability of character, which forbade Louise to exercise severity, or exact obedience. As she sat, however, in full view of the child, who was now mounted upon a chair, acting in his favorite capacity of an imaginary horseman, with the long ends of the mantle serving as a bridle, she more than once had her fears excited for the safety both of the boy, and the ermine. A slight start on her part caused Louise, at one time, to turn her head in that direction, but, dreading a stormy altercation with the little rebel, she closed her eyes to the possibility of the mischief that might ensue, and, with a languid smile, permitted him to continue his sport. At length, a sudden jerk on Murray’s part, and the mantle, which towards the end was narrow and slender, became rent, and gave way, precipitating the child to the floor, the fragment of the torn fur still grasped tightly in his hand.</p>
			<p>Mabel sprung to his assistance, for, although his fall was not heavy, or from a great height, he uttered a succession of piercing shrieks, and she feared he might be seriously hurt. Louise started at the same moment, but Mabel had lifted the boy to his feet before his mother reached the spot. The eager question of the former, “are you hurt, darling?” was scarcely answered, and he still continued sobbing, when Louise caught sight of the torn fur, which she angrily snatched from his hand. Alas! now, for that softness of manner of which many beside Mabel had often experienced the charm! It vanished in an instant. The subdued voice of Louise was changed to loud tones of reproach; words of sudden anger took the place of her usual languid accents, and the little hand, so perfect in contour, so graceful in gesture, now gave added force to her words, as she inflicted with it a sudden blow upon Murray’s offending palm. But the refractory urchin was no unresisting victim of her displeasure; he boldly maintained his defence, and Mabel became the witness of a violent and noisy struggle, which ended in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy’s forcibly expelling the child from the room, amid a succession of kicks, screams, and threats, which would, probably, have alarmed the household, had not such outbursts been a matter of almost daily occurrence. Grieved and shocked at the scene, Mabel expected to see her sister still more painfully affected by so unnatural a conflict. But, on the contrary, Louise turned to her with a smile, and on observing her half-embarrassed, half-distressed expression, laughed outright.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid he is hurt,” suggested Mabel, “he cried so loud when he first fell.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” answered Louise, in a careless tone, “he always cries so;” and she proceeded to the examination of her mantle, fitting the piece in her hand into the place from which it was torn, and saying “what a shame! I wonder if I can get it mended at Lefarge’s?”</p>
			<p>So intent was she in considering the best mode of repairing the damage, that for several minutes she took no notice of Mabel, who gradually recovered from her surprise at the contradictions in her sister’s temper, especially as she found that this little outbreak of maternal indignation exercised no lasting check upon the merriment of the child, whom she soon heard in the neighboring nursery, engaged in happy play.</p>
			<p>Two or three hours had elapsed, the season of lunch was long passed, and Mabel’s conscience beginning once more to reproach her for this continued stay, she had persuaded Louise to send for a carriage. It had not yet arrived, and she was somewhat impatiently awaiting it, when a loud cry was raised in the nursery, and a moment after, Murray came screaming into the room, evidently in some new distress, and, quite forgetful of past difficulties, running to his mother for sympathy. She opened her arms to receive him, begged to know what was the matter with her sweet pet, and with many tender and exaggerated expressions of solicitude, promised that whoever had harmed him should be punished.</p>
			<p>Alick had harmed him, had pushed and kicked him, and both he and Lydia had called him ugly names.</p>
			<p>“I called him no ugly names,” exclaimed the tired-looking young nurse, appearing at the door, her face, at first pale, becoming quite red as she observed the presence of Mabel.</p>
			<p>“Be quiet!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy, in an imperative voice to the girl; and going to the open door of the nursery, she demanded of Alick, in a severe tone, what new injury he had been doing his brother, adding, in the same breath, “I know you are always rude to him.”</p>
			<p>“He’s rude to me,” was the boy’s surly reply.</p>
			<p>His mother, unsparing of words and threats, continued to reprove him, but he made no further apology, receiving her rebukes with indifference, not to say inattention, and deigning no answers to her inquiries into his behavior. He found an advocate, however, in Lydia, who commenced at once, “Alick was not to blame, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy,⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You need not tell me that, Lydia,” replied her mistress, “I know who is always to blame in these quarrels.”</p>
			<p>“He called me names,” muttered Murray, “he did. He said I was a beggar!”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t!” retorted Alick, speaking bluntly, and between his teeth.</p>
			<p>“No, ma’am,” exclaimed Lydia, earnestly. “I was telling them what a good little sister I had at home; Alick said he should like to see her, ma’am, and I promised to take him there, if you had no objections. It was Murray himself who spoke of beggars. I’m sure Rosy is no beggar, and if my mother isn’t rich, she is very respectable.”</p>
			<p>“I said I didn’t want to go and see any beggar girls, and no I don’t!” said Murray, “and then Alick said I wasn’t any better than a beggar myself. I am, aint I, mother?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, my dear. Alick you are a bad boy to talk so to your brother,⁠—and, Lydia, don’t let me hear any more of this. Of course, you are not to take either of the boys to any low places. The children you are used to may be good children, and they may not, but, at all events, they are not fit company for my children.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leroy,” exclaimed Lydia, her face becoming suffused with the deepest crimson, her eye flashing angrily, but the trembling of her lip, at the same time, giving evidence of an emotion deeper than wounded pride,⁠—“indeed, ma’am, I only wish you could see such children as I am used to; there’s some among ’em that might teach a lesson even to a lady.”</p>
			<p>If there was incivility in this remark from a young girl to her mistress, it was almost lost sight of by Mabel, who was struck by the deep earnestness and feeling with which it was spoken. Not so with Louise. She viewed the girl’s words merely as an outbreak of impertinence, and passed judgment upon them accordingly. It would have been well for her dignity, if she could have so far commanded her temper as to speak Lydia’s dismissal with calmness. But this was not the case. In the violent and abusive language with which she assailed her for forgetfulness of place, and neglect of the respect due to her superiors, she more than forfeited her own position as a lady, nor could Mabel feel otherwise than shocked at the harshness with which she assured the poor girl that she had forfeited her month’s wages, at the same time forbidding her to leave her service until a new nurse was provided.</p>
			<p>It was some consolation to perceive that these fits of temper were as transient as they were severe. As Louise closed the nursery door upon Lydia, she seemed to exhaust her displeasure in the words, “there, I have done with her;⁠—now I shall have the trouble of finding another nurse for those children,⁠—little plagues;” and the next moment she addressed some light remark to Mabel on the subject of her dress for the approaching evening,⁠—adding, “I will go this minute and borrow <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker’s ear-rings, to try if coral is becoming to me!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
