<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>In her deep, melancholy eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life’s brilliant hues no longer lie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love itself, its sweetest light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has left behind a starless night.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A night? Ah, no! ’Tis early dawn⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The long, dark, hopeless hours are gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Faith, the day-spring from on high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is beaming through her heavenward eye.</span>
					</p>
					<cite><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S. C. E.</abbr> Mayo.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>If the exaltation of soul under which a high resolve is usually formed could be maintained during the period required for its fulfilment, the battle would be fought and the victory achieved almost without an effort. But who has not experienced the reaction, weakness, and self-distrust which are the natural consequence of an unwonted strain upon the physical and mental powers. Then, indeed, do we learn how little we can depend upon our own feeble efforts, unless sustained and strengthened by help and guidance from on high.</p>
			<p>So it was with Mabel, when she awoke the morning after her supposed self-conquest, oppressed with a painful sense of lassitude and despondency, which made it an effort to rise and dress, and a still greater effort to look back upon the past with composure, and forward into the future with cheerfulness. She fully realized the unexpected truth, that not by one spasmodic effort can the soul achieve the sublime heights of self-denying virtue, but only by continual and persevering struggles, and a patient resting upon Him whose promise is steadfast,⁠—“I will never leave you nor forsake you.”</p>
			<p>Fortunately, her little Bible was close at hand, with its blessed words of encouragement and peace; and after resorting to its pages for counsel, and commending herself to Heaven in prayer, she felt in some degree prepared to meet the events of the day. In the hall leading to the dining-room she met Robert, who reported the departure of the pleasure-party, all, according to his account, in high spirits except Alick and Murray, both of whom were crying with disappointment at her absence.</p>
			<p>Mabel felt a rising in the throat, and a painful sinking of the spirits, as she thought of the dear children’s grief and the still greater void which would be felt in the company by one who would join them at noon, would look for her amid the party, and, astonished at her absence, perhaps misconstruing its cause, would vainly seek from Louise a satisfactory solution of the mystery. Her drooping courage revived, however, at the unmistakable satisfaction which succeeded her father’s first glance of surprise, as she entered the dining-room and approached the table where he was seated at breakfast. He had seen Robert return with the carriage, and supposed her already on her way to Albany; but listened with evident pleasure to her assurance that she had concluded, since she parted from him the previous day, to abandon the scheme altogether.</p>
			<p>Attributing this change in her plans to some trifling disagreement with Louise, or dissatisfaction with the proposed arrangements, he forbore questioning her as to the cause of her apparently fickle conduct, but quite contented with the result, expressed himself with more than his ordinary decision in the words, “I am glad of it, my dear,⁠—very glad. I have not approved, from the first, of your travelling with so large a party. Now, I trust, there is nothing to interfere with your visit to your aunt Margaret.” So much was he gratified, indeed, that as he rose to leave the room, having finished his early breakfast, he laid his hand upon her head in an affectionate and paternal manner, which, considering his usual undemonstrative and reserved character, might almost be termed a caress, and at least signified a marked degree of approval.</p>
			<p>Light as was the touch, it drew tears from Mabel’s eyes, and left its impress on her heart for many a long day afterward. It seemed to reward her sacrifice with a father’s blessing.</p>
			<p>Harry’s views and feelings, as he entered a moment after, were not so easy to determine.</p>
			<p>“You see I have not gone,” said Mabel, with an attempt at playfulness, as he made his appearance in the door-way and stopped short at sight of her.</p>
			<p>“So I perceive,” said he, advancing into the room and seating himself at the table with a languid air.</p>
			<p>“We women have such a blessed privilege of changing our minds, you know,” added she in the same tone.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I should think so; you seem to have veered about with as much ease as a weather-cock. It is not many hours ago that I saw you plumed and winged for flight.”</p>
			<p>“My plumes drooped and my wings refused to soar, when it came to the trial!”</p>
			<p>“Aren’t you well?” asked he quickly, at the same time looking her anxiously and inquiringly in the face.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, quite well, but I concluded to stay at home and make tea and coffee for father and you; taste and see if that is sweet enough,” continued she, as she handed him a cup of steaming Mocha which she had been preparing.</p>
			<p>He received the cup with an unsteady hand, rattled the spoon nervously, added several lumps of sugar in an absent way, then ladled them out carefully into his saucer, helped himself to a piece of steak, ate voraciously for a minute or two, and, finally, laying down his knife and fork, pushed back his chair and seized the newspaper, which had fallen on the floor beside him.</p>
			<p>Mabel could not be sure whether he were suspicious or not that her journey had been abandoned on his account; but she was pained at the evident annoyance which her presence and attentions occasioned him. So manifest was his desire to escape her observations, that she strayed to the window, busied herself in feeding a canary, whose cage was suspended there, and when Harry suddenly and impatiently started up and left the room, forbore to question or follow him. She knew very well that the recovery of her influence over her brother must be the work of time and patience, and that he would not endure to be either watched or catechised.</p>
			<p>So this day proved no exception to the ordinary rule, and, as usual, he strolled from home soon after breakfast, without giving her any hint of his destination, or the probable time of his return.</p>
			<p>It was hard to see him walk away so indifferent to her newly roused affection, her anxiety, her prayers in his behalf, and to be left alone to reflect on the seeming uselessness of the sacrifice she had made. Had this sacrifice involved some active labor, some constant employment for head and hands, it would have been comparatively easy to one of Mabel’s energetic temperament. But passive endurance, patient waiting, hoping against hope, heroic virtues as they are, offer little stimulus to resolution, and require the severest exercise of self-denying fortitude.</p>
			<p>Thus it was not strange that her spirits flagged, as she wandered listlessly from room to room; that her thoughts strayed to the pleasure-bound company of whom she had hoped to make one; and that as the remembrance of a still dearer hope agitated her heart, she could not resist the obtruding regret or check the rising tear.</p>
			<p>But Mabel by nature was neither weak nor desponding; uncertainty and doubt had, it is true, to some degree paralyzed her powers, and while halting between two opinions her irresolute conduct had betrayed the indecision of her mind.</p>
			<p>The path of right made plain, however, and conscientiously adopted, there was a firmness, stability, and self-respect in her character which, with the aid of Christian principle, gave promise that, cost her what it might, she would pursue it faithfully to the end. “I have made my choice,” thought she, as, starting up from an indolent and meditative posture, she seemed at the same time to shake off the morbid and discouraging fancies which were gradually settling down upon her mind. “If Dudley loves me truly, he can trust me; if not,⁠—but I will not suppose that possible,⁠—he knows how much I depended on the journey, he will believe that no slight cause has detained me here,⁠—he will return and assure himself of the truth. In the mean time I will not waste my energies in useless repining.”</p>
			<p>So, resorting to the well-remembered remedy always recommended by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert in cases of home-sickness and other mental maladies, she at once sought employment, and commenced, reluctantly, the task of answering numerous letters from her school-mates. She made every effort to write in a cheerful strain, and her young friends saw nothing in her communications to indicate the circumstances under which they were written; but as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, who was permitted to peruse them, observed that her once glowing descriptions of city life were wholly superseded by tender and touching reminiscences of her school days, she inwardly suspected that the former had already palled upon her taste, and that she yearned once more for the simple joys of her childhod and her country home.</p>
			<p>Mabel made more than one attempt to thank this long-tried friend for her recently discovered and precious gift, to express some sense of the earnest gratitude she felt for all her love and counsel, and rejoice her heart with the assurance that the lessons so faithfully imparted to her in youth were destined to be the guide of her womanhood; but each time she shrunk from the difficulties involved in such an attempt, and at length laid down her pen in despair of succeeding to her own satisfaction. She dared not boast of resolutions not yet confirmed by practice; she feared to betray the secret of her disquiet and unhappiness, nor could she compromise Harry by replying truthfully to the many inquiries concerning him, which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s affectionate interest in his welfare had suggested. So the difficult duty was for the present abandoned altogether.</p>
			<p>At two o’clock <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan came home to an early dinner, as had been his custom since the weather became warm. Harry did not make his appearance, however, and Mabel, as she sat opposite her father at table, was struck with his extremely anxious and haggard countenance. He was more than usually taciturn, only rousing himself from his abstraction once during the meal, and then to remark, rather abruptly, “You are all alone, my dear,⁠—it is very dull for you,⁠—I hope we shall break up here before many days.”</p>
			<p>Mabel declared herself ready to go or remain, as he thought best, and no more was said on the subject; but after a hurried repast, he rose to repair to his office.</p>
			<p>The weather was tempting, there was no prospect of Harry’s return for some hours, and Mabel proposed to accompany her father a part of the way.</p>
			<p>He assented to the proposition in an absent manner, and paced the hall impatiently until she appeared ready for the walk. So silent and self-engrossed was he, that Mabel walked beside him for the distance of several squares, without his addressing a syllable to her, nor could she fail to observe with pain an increased stoop in his figure, and tremulousness in his gait. She left him at the corner of the street leading to the widow Hope’s dwelling; and as she proceeded thither to inquire after Rose, her sadness at these symptoms of old age and debility in her recently strong and vigorous parent, was mingled with a fresh glow of self-gratulation that she had not suffered herself to act in direct opposition to his wishes.</p>
			<p>Rosy was overjoyed at seeing her, and Lydia, who stood behind the counter waiting upon a customer, was so excited with pleasure that she could scarcely command sufficient arithmetic to make the simple calculations which her office involved. None of the family had seen her since Rosy’s never-to-be-forgotten drive; and of all the kindnesses she had rendered them, none had ever called forth so warm an expression of gratitude.</p>
			<p>“She’s been brighter and better ever since,” exclaimed the mother, with tears in her eyes, “and so happy!”</p>
			<p>“Miss Mabel,” cried the excited Lydia, “it was splendid; how came you to think of it? it has half cured her! and those dear boys,⁠—they were as pleased as if they’d never had a ride before, and all on Rosy’s account, too,⁠—look at her, Miss Mabel, see how she has brightened up.”</p>
			<p>She did, indeed, seem changed; there was an expression on the little face such as Mabel had never seen there before; it seemed to tell of some inward rapture, some foretaste of coming glory.</p>
			<p>“Miss Mabel,” said Rose, in her little quiet voice, when her mother had walked away, and Lydia had returned to the counter, “it isn’t that I am any better, but it has given me such beautiful thoughts all day, and such beautiful dreams all night. I know I shan’t be here long, but I am not afraid to go. Oh, Miss Mabel, if God’s earth is so glorious, what must his Heaven be!”</p>
			<p>“Earth is but a sad place, after all, Rosy,” said Mabel, with a sigh.</p>
			<p>The child’s ear, tuned to that plaintive minor chord which reveals the suffering of the heart, recognized as by intuition the mood of Mabel’s mind, and turning upon her a face full of tender anxiety, she said, “Do you call it sad? are you a weary pilgrim, too? and is your path ever dark? I thought it was always as bright as sunshine.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Rosy,” said Mabel, glancing up at the engraving from which, as usual, Rose’s figure was drawn, “I cannot see my way at all, there is such a thick cloud over head.”</p>
			<p>She had not calculated upon the effect of this acknowledgment, which she would have shrunk from making to one less simple-hearted and innocent than Rose. It seemed to establish at once the only bond of sympathy ever wanting between herself and the suffering child, who seized her hand, pressed it to her thin lips, and exclaimed, fervently, “God will show the way, Miss Mabel; he will lighten your path as he has lightened mine.”</p>
			<p>The child’s solemn and prophetic assurance of heavenly guidance, both awed and touched the soul that yearned for encouragement and strength. Mabel could not answer, except by the tears which started to her eyes. Rose went on.</p>
			<p>“There used to be long days and nights, Miss Mabel, when I lay on my little bed in great pain, worrying to think how much trouble I gave, how poor we were, and, more than all, about Jack, and what would become of him. I could not see God always then. I could not understand how so many sorrows could be sent in love. I tried to be patient. I tried to be hopeful and believing; but I could not understand. I see it all now, though,” she added, a glow overspreading and irradiating her pale face, while the eyes that had lost their strained appearance seemed calmly to contemplate a near and visible joy. “The pain is all gone. I am not anxious now, not even about Jack; the picture promised truly,⁠—the end has almost come, and the light I see is that which streams from the Paradise of God.”</p>
			<p>She looked, indeed, like one already half translated, as, borne on the wings of faith, she saw all her past sufferings merged in the fulness of joy.</p>
			<p>Such a clear discerning of God’s providence in one who had groped her way through a sea of suffering, was like a light shining in a dark place. The cloud seemed lifted from Mabel’s future, as she listened to the child’s grateful tribute to the love which had crowned her days.</p>
			<p>“Dear Rose, dear child,” said she, “it does me good to see you so happy. You certainly have a heaven in your heart,⁠—I must try and learn some of your secrets.”</p>
			<p>The child smiled at the last word, then with mingled sweetness and gravity, whispered, drawing Mabel down so that her mouth came close to her ear, “God will send his blessed angels to teach you all my secrets, and I will pray to Him every night to take away your cloud.”</p>
			<p>From this time, the relations hitherto subsisting between Mabel and Rose seemed totally reversed. Until now, the former had acted the part of the elder, stronger, wiser friend, but in this, and in all their future interviews, the strength, the wisdom, and the riper years, which had constituted her superiority, instinctively gave place to that experience in Heavenly truth, that knowledge of things divine, in which Rose was the thoroughly-gifted teacher, and she but the humble disciple. It is true there was no outward and visible token of their altered position. Beauty, wealth, and a high place in the social scale, all combined to render Mabel, as she had ever been, the object of the sick girl’s respectful admiration; and the infirmities of Rose, more than ever, claimed the tenderest compassion in return; but a shadow had fallen on the path of the one, while the other had reached the point where all shadows flee away; and the maiden who had but just begun to meet the battle of life, gladly caught up the sacred weapons with which the child had achieved her victory.</p>
			<p>Thus, almost daily, she found herself drawn to that little sanctuary of holy hopes, devout meditations, and serene joy, where not she alone, but many a troubled heart besides, learned a true and lasting lesson from the unconscious glow of piety which illumined the face of the wasted and now dying girl.</p>
			<p>Almost to the last, she occupied her little flag-bottomed armchair, in the window of her mother’s shop, reluctant to give up her daily and loving intercourse with the numerous friends who looked to see her there, and so much was Mabel with her during the last fortnight of her life, that her face, too, became familiar to the neighborhood, which seemed animated by a grateful affection for Rosy’s beautiful friend.</p>
			<p>They knew how unsparing she had been in attentions and gifts to the little invalid; they had measured with their eyes many a parcel of books, fruit, and wholesome food, which they had seen carried into the widow’s dwelling, and they had rejoiced in Rosy’s joy on the eventful day of the drive.</p>
			<p>But they did not know the precious blessings she had carried away, they could not measure the refreshing nourishment her soul had imbibed from this fountain of childish wisdom, they could not rejoice in the holy and penitent emotions there awakened⁠—emotions such as make joy in Heaven.</p>
			<p>Only in after years did Mabel herself fully realize the source whence most of her holy aspirations were drawn; only when she had proved the fallacy of more presumptuous teachers, and learned that the sublimest truths are often those which God has hid from the wise and prudent, and has revealed unto babes!</p>
			<p>On the day of the conversation with Rose, some portion of which has been related in detail, she left the widow Hope’s shop to return home, with a heart wonderfully cheered and lightened of its burthen. It was nearly dark, when, as she crossed the little park in the direction leading to her father’s house, she overtook Harry. He had entered the square from a different street, and seeing her hastening towards him, stopped and waited for her.</p>
			<p>“You have been walking fast,” said he, as she came up.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she answered, a little out of breath, “I saw it was getting dark.”</p>
			<p>He did not ask where she had been, but walked beside her in silence, and when they reached the house, accompanied her up the steps and rang the bell.</p>
			<p>As Robert appeared, however, and opened the door, he turned to walk away.</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t go, Harry!” exclaimed she, adding with womanly tact, “I shall be all alone.” She knew how much more readily in his present mood he would confer than receive a favor. “Father has not come in, has he?” asked she, turning quickly to Robert.</p>
			<p>“No, Miss.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, do stay then, Harry, and take tea with me.”</p>
			<p>“Tea,” muttered he, as he reluctantly followed her into the hall, “who wants tea such a warm evening?”</p>
			<p>“Aunt Sabiah says one is always cooler after tea in summer,” replied she playfully, leading the way as she spoke to her little treasure apartment.</p>
			<p>“Because the sun has gone down,” replied he, with a smile, almost with a laugh.</p>
			<p>Far as it was from being a genuine, hearty laugh, Mabel hailed it as of good omen, and flinging her bonnet upon the table, and throwing open the blinds of a wide window extending to the floor, she at once gave admittance to the breeze, and imparted an attractive air to the little apartment. Harry drew an arm chair to the window, threw himself into it, and looked out. Mabel sat down on the window-sill resting her feet on a little balcony outside. The moon presently began to shine on the little park, and the trees to cast long shadows. It was a pleasant scene, presented by this June evening, even in the city. It reminded Mabel of similar evenings at her grandmother’s, or <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s, when she and Harry had sat together for hours on the door-step in the moon-light. She ventured some reference to those bygone days, and Harry, falling in with her train of thought, listened without impatience to her reminiscences, and even called up incidents in their childhood which had quite escaped her recollection.</p>
			<p>Tremblingly rejoicing in the success which was attending her efforts, Mabel spared no pains to render the occasion agreeable. She ordered tea to be brought to them instead of descending to the dining-room, and bade Robert light the alabaster lamp, which threw a scarcely less soft and pleasant glow of light through the room than that which prevailed outside.</p>
			<p>Now and then Harry rose and paced the room nervously, as if on the point of leaving her; then, seeming to think she would be lonely,⁠—possibly timid,⁠—for there was an unusual noise of voices in the street below, he sat down again, and so the evening passed away. Mabel could not but suspect that he had staid with her reluctantly, but it was no slight triumph that he had remained on any terms, and it was an inexpressible satisfaction to bid him good-night, and see him ascend to his own room, like the Harry of former times.</p>
			<p>Taught by this instance of success, she afterwards made frequent appeals to his kind and brotherly feeling, and occasionally with a similar result. She needed exercise,⁠—would he take a walk with her? she longed for the country air,⁠—would he not drive her out? selfish pleas, which she might reasonably urge, for her life was one of unusual restraint and monotony. She chose for her constant occupancy a seat in her little room, where Harry was almost sure to find her whenever he felt the disposition, and it soon became evident that his desire to avoid her society was somewhat abated, as he often lounged in for a few moments at a time, either after breakfast, or when he chanced to return home to dinner. But though he no longer seemed to look upon her as one seeking occasion to watch and censure him, and though now and then she succeeded in engrossing a short interval of his time, these grounds of hope were slight and infrequent, while her discouragements were continual and pressing. Day by day his countenance grew more unnatural, his step more unsteady, while his expression of nervous distress and uneasiness had become fixed and habitual. Midnight and the early morning hours often found Mabel at her solitary window, awaiting his return; and the disappointment of his failing to come at all was less bitter than the coarse jokes, angry oaths, or wild, wandering glances, which at times betrayed his sad condition.</p>
			<p>Her father, too, was evidently the subject of more than one harassing anxiety. Those fatal charts over which he had pored all winter, engrossed his time whenever he chanced to be at home, and, frequently, when he left the house, he rolled them up and took them under his arm, while Mabel watched him as he came and went every time with a deeper shadow on his brow.</p>
			<p>And there was still another for whom she watched and waited, who came not at all; another footstep whose fancied echo now and then caused her a sudden start; another form which haunted her by day and stole into her dreams at night; but step and form were alike imaginary. Had there been a letter, or a message simply, it might have afforded some solace to her aching heart⁠—had Louise even written, and incidentally alluded to the companions of her journey; but no, all was blank silence, and Mabel was forced to the conclusion⁠—he does not trust, perhaps he never loved.</p>
			<p>All her faith, indeed, was needed to sustain her drooping spirits in the many lonely hours to which she was condemned. As she wandered through the solitary rooms of her father’s spacious house, she sometimes longed for the idle rattle of Louise, the merry voices of the boys, or even the light foot and busy tongue of Cecilia, to break the dreary silence and monotony.</p>
			<p>But in these seasons of sad and solitary reflection, deprived of all human sympathy, Mabel began to experience how sweet it is to draw near to the ever-present friend, who has bid His children cast all their cares upon Him, for He careth for them; she learned to realize in these bitter hours of life, that there is one eye that never sleepeth, one ear that is ever open to the suppliant’s cry; and often, rising above her sorrows and forgetting her solitude, she was ready to exclaim, “I am not alone, because the Father is with me.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
