<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>A lovely being scarcely formed or moulded,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A rose with all its sweetest leaves yet folded.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>Byron.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Mabel Vaughan was the daughter of a New York merchant, a man of remarkable business capacity, undoubted integrity, and reputed wealth; one who although of highly respectable parentage, good education, and fair advantages for a start in life, had nevertheless been in a great degree the framer of his own fortunes, having passed through all the phases incident to the accumulation of a large property.</p>
			<p>While thus sacrificing his youth, however, and with it all his best and noblest powers to the pursuit of wealth, he found no opportunity for the forming of domestic ties, and it was not until he was fast verging upon middle life that he even meditated matrimony. He had by this time gained that point in the social scale, when he was marked as a rising man of wide commercial influence, and this distinction, together with his gentlemanly bearing, found him favor in the eyes of a beautiful and fashionable woman, whose fair face had captivated his fancy, and whose family connection was such as to gratify his ambition.</p>
			<p>There was between them no similarity of taste or habit, however, and the union which succeeded their short acquaintance, was productive of but little happiness to either party. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had hoped to find at his own fireside that quiet and relaxation from care, of which he had experienced the want, and failing in this, he sought amid the speculation and excitement of business to forget the disappointment he had experienced in his home, while his wife, after pursuing for a time those gaieties which her husband refused to share, became the victim, first, of complaining self-indulgence, and finally of positive ill health.</p>
			<p>Fatal as this utter want of sympathy proved to the welfare of the ill-assorted pair, its consequences were still more injurious to their children, especially to the eldest, a daughter, who from infancy to womanhood was exposed to all its unfortunate influences. At the birth of this little girl, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s interests and affections were again turned from his counting-house, to centre in the home where he once more began to meditate upon those fireside and domestic joys which had always figured in his dreams of married life. But his wife did not share these fond aspirations, and the child proving an insufficient object to win her from a course of dissipated gayety, was soon abandoned to the care of strangers, save as the father strove at intervals, by fond and injudicious indulgence to atone for the mother’s neglect. During six succeeding years, this daughter continued the sole occupant of the nursery, and the sole victim of her parent’s mismanagement. At the end of that time a boy, and, a few years after, another girl were added to the household. Louise, however, the eldest, was by this time promoted to the companionship of her mother, who now become a restless and nervous invalid, sought to divert her mind with the pretty and graceful child, whose education and accomplishments she resolved herself to superintend. And the result of such superintendence was this. Louise, at sixteen was a fine dancer, a tolerably skilful musician, and a complete mistress of all the arts of coquetry. Nature had given her a pretty face, and symmetry of form, and early practice had taught her to turn both to good account. Despite her youth, too, she had, by sedulous cultivation, acquired many so-called fascinations of manner, which acted powerfully upon those who shut their eyes to her extreme affectation; and her utter want of mental and moral discipline was atoned for in the eyes of her mother’s circle of friends, by a natural quickness of intellect, and a proverbial amiability of disposition.</p>
			<p>These latter qualities, however, so far as she in reality possessed them, were given her at birth. They could not be numbered among her acquirements, for unfortunately her heart, mind, and soul had been quite overlooked in her education.</p>
			<p>Such being the consequence of the mother’s supervision, it could scarcely be a matter of regret that Harry and Mabel were, for the most part, shut out from her presence and her care. Harry was so noisy, and his little sister had adopted so many of his rude ways, that both were unfit for her sacred precincts, even if she had considered them of a suitable age to profit by her instruction; and as it was, she condemned them wholly to the care of a newly-hired nurse.</p>
			<p>Fortunately this nurse, though ignorant, was faithful; though severe, impartial; and though unimaginative, true. She could rarely give satisfactory replies to the questions suggested by their innocent curiosity, but at the same time she taught them no evil. Her management was often such as to thwart their favorite schemes, but she never punished them unjustly, or complained of them without reason; and if her dull and uncultivated intellect failed to furnish diversion for theirs, she at least practised upon them no deception, and entertained them with no gossip.</p>
			<p>Thus, while their young natures failed to ripen as rapidly as they might have done under other tutelage, and their faculties found little scope for development or growth, they were spared many of the evil influences which had early corrupted the mind of the less fortunate Louise; and if their young souls were checked in their infant expansion, they at least were not poisoned in the bud.</p>
			<p>Before Harry had reached his ninth year his impatient spirit burst the bounds of nursery restraint, and obtaining from his indulgent father permission to attend school, he was sent from home to form boyish connections and friendships, leaving his little sister deprived of her cherished playmate, her only companion in thraldom.</p>
			<p>Then followed a dreary season, long remembered by poor Mabel, when, during many tedious months, she kept on with her lonesome plays, having no variety in her monotonous life, save a daily walk with her nurse, a short visit from her often abstracted father, or a summons to the parlor, from which she was sure to be banished on occasion of the slightest childish offence.</p>
			<p>And then came the release! Alas, that a mother’s death should have imparted new life to her child! But so it was, though none but angel eyes perhaps traced out the workings of that infinite love which recalled the unfaithful, earthly parent, that a heavenly father’s hand might furnish a better guardianship for his child. The well-dressed groups who assembled to pay the last honors to her who had once been the ornament of their circle, and who bestowed upon her awe-struck and sable-clad daughter the epithets “Poor Mabel!”⁠—“Poor little motherless one!”⁠—this short-sighted group would have started, perhaps, at the lesson and shrunk from the warning, had the voice of truth whispered in their ears that the holiest trust committed to the parent is sometimes recalled, in mercy to the child.</p>
			<p>Mabel was eight years old when her mother died, and being the only one of the children who was under the paternal roof at the time, she became the more immediate object of her widowed father’s thoughts. Louise had recently been sent to a fashionable boarding-school; Harry still continued at his academy; but Mabel must be provided for. Both the calls of business and his own choice combined to render <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan desirous of leaving the country and closing his house for an indefinite period; but in this case some arrangement must be made which would furnish a suitable home for his little girl.</p>
			<p>As she sat on his knee one evening, about a week after his wife’s death, and his thoughts, sobered by that solemn event, and concentrated more ardently than was their wont upon his children’s future welfare, were especially bent upon the promotion of Mabel’s happiness and improvement, there darted into his mind one of those Heaven-directed ideas, whose happy and far-reaching results seem to prove the divinity of their source.</p>
			<p>He had, within the past month, received a letter informing him of the death of an old friend, one who had been a playmate of his boyhood, and for whom he had ever continued to feel a warm and consistent regard. This regard had recently been attested by the loan of a sum of money, trifling in the eyes of the wealthy merchant, but of infinite importance to his friend, who, with an increasing family and pursuing a poorly-paid literary career, had become sadly embarrassed for the want of this small amount.</p>
			<p>He died, however, before an opportunity had ever arrived for defraying the debt, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s recent letter from his widow was written less with the view of informing him of her loss, than to acquaint him with her inability to meet his just demands, and to request his indulgence for the present. This was readily accorded, and with a sigh of regret for his friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan dismissed the subject from his mind.</p>
			<p>Now, however, as he gazed in the face of his little daughter, reflected upon the disappointment he could not but feel in Louise, and resolved that a wholly different course should be pursued with Mabel’s education, he conceived a sudden desire to place her under the sole charge of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert,⁠—the widow of his friend,⁠—confide to her the trust of which he felt conscious he was scarcely more worthy than his wife had been, and delegate to her the entire authority which had thus far been neglected and abused.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was poor; she had three children to support by her own exertions, and was eager and anxious to employ herself profitably. The proposal, therefore, which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan made without delay, accompanying it with the most generous pecuniary offers, was as promptly accepted; and thus it happened that Mabel became, as we have seen, one of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s household.</p>
			<p>We may not pause to trace the benefits which resulted from this event to the widow and her family. The child’s coming, indeed, was the signal and forerunner of many blessings; it roused <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert to hope and to exertion; it laid the foundation for what became in time a well-established and prosperous school; and long after, when she had acquired independence for herself, and beheld with joy the prosperity of her children, she failed not to look back to Mabel’s entrance into her household as the date of all her after success. Often are mercies thus combined, and far-reaching are the schemes of Providence; but it is with their influence upon Mabel alone that we now have anything to do.</p>
			<p>She remained ten years under <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s care, often passing her vacations in that home which was to her the happiest she had ever known, and never, during this long period, revisiting her native city, save on the occasion of her sister’s marriage with a wealthy banker, which took place when Mabel was still a mere child. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s house was at that time leased to strangers, and the wedding ceremonies were held under the hospitable roof of a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vannecker, a distant relative of the late <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan, who had been proud to usher Louise into society, and now boasted that she had made the match.</p>
			<p>Here the family were assembled to participate in the preparations and festivities attendant upon the event, all of which were entered into with eager zest by Mabel, and remembered by her afterwards rather as a brilliant dream than an actual reality.</p>
			<p>With this exception she never left her school, save for a yearly visit to her grandmother, whose residence was within a day’s journey from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s; and these visits were of longer or shorter continuance, according to the old lady’s state of health, or the convenience of Mabel’s aunt, Miss Sabiah Vaughan, who continued to live with her mother, and had charge of the housekeeping. From these absences, however, which from one cause or another were usually of limited duration, she invariably returned with joy to her kind teacher and beloved playmates, by whom she was sure to have been sadly missed, and was always warmly welcomed back, for Mabel was the life of the household.</p>
			<p>And here, amid healthful influences, and under the judicious training of one of the best of women, she rapidly developed those powers and capacities which had in her early childhood found little scope for their expansion.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was a religious woman, and she spared no pains to impart to Mabel the knowledge and love of virtue. She had sound judgment and a highly cultivated intellect, and patiently sought to guide and strengthen the mind of her pupil, and store it with lasting treasures. She was possessed, too, of those social qualities which give a charm to home and render a fireside comfortable and happy; and the youthful group around her were encouraged by her example to the cultivation of every endearing and feminine grace.</p>
			<p>Nor was she less a practical than an accomplished woman. She understood every branch of house keeping, every art in needle-work, and had acquired, through years of rigid practice, economy, prudence and skill, in all of which branches her pupils reaped, in a greater or less degree, the benefit of her experience.</p>
			<p>Thus, during ten years passed in a plain but well-ordered New England homestead, where the highest mental discipline was combined with instruction in the simplest female duties, Mabel acquired strength of principle, soundness of knowledge, cheerfulness of disposition, and useful and industrious habits. Meantime, her physical development had kept pace with her mental and moral growth; pure air, healthful exercise, and wholesome diet, strengthening and hardening her frame, while with every succeeding year she grew in beauty and grace, until <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert gazed at length with inward pride and delight upon the fair blossom that her own hand had reared, and which had ripened beneath her very eye.</p>
			<p>When Mabel, at eight years of age, was first placed under <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s charge, she was a shy, unformed child, rude in her manners and speech, and wholly unused to any kind of application. At eighteen she was not only beautiful in person, cultivated in mind, and amiable and affectionate in disposition, but to her rich personal and mental gifts she added a winning frankness and cordiality of manner, which, springing as they did from a warm and sincere heart, combined with her other attractions to render her the favorite as well as the pride of her companions.</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was not infallible, nor Mabel faultless. True, the former had labored diligently for the improvement of one who, next to her own children, was the principal object of her endeavors and prayers, and had met undoubtedly with a proportionate degree of success. But there were faults in Mabel’s character which time and diligence had not yet uprooted; faults of whose full extent <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was scarcely aware, and which were fostered by circumstances beyond her control. Mabel’s very popularity among her schoolmates exposed her to danger; and amid the varying characters with which she came in familiar contact, she could not wholly escape pernicious influences, especially during the latter years of her school life, when the number of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s pupils had greatly increased.</p>
			<p>These faults, however, were not vital. They were such only as are common to most girls of her age, and we need not pause to dwell upon them, for in due season they will present themselves to notice as we follow her in her after career.</p>
			<p>Conscious as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert was of a faithful discharge of duty, and well rewarded as her efforts had for the most part been, she had too much good sense, too much knowledge of the waywardness of the human heart, to believe for a moment that Mabel was henceforth secure from temptation, or proof against its assaults. And, therefore, as she read the few hasty lines from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan, which summoned his daughter to the superintendence of his house, and the enjoyment of city gayeties, she trembled at the thought that thenceforward Mabel must mark out her own path, unsustained by the guiding hand and almost maternal love which had thus far fostered and protected her.</p>
			<p>It needed, indeed, no prophetic eye to foresee the peculiar exposures and dangers which awaited Mabel’s future. Already had <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert observed the pride with which the fond father, in his occasional visits, gazed upon his daughter’s daily increasing charms, and already had she more than once been compelled to remonstrate against the lavish and profuse indulgence with which he proposed to gratify her girlish whims. She knew, too, the gay and thoughtless circles in which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vaughan had moved, in which Louise now shone triumphant, and in which Mabel would be sure to be admired, flattered, and caressed.</p>
			<p>And because she knew all this, and because she rightly conjectured that in this new sphere no pains would be spared to gratify Mabel’s vanity, encourage her ambition, foster her pride, and administer to her self-love, did she tremble for her purity of heart and disinterestedness of purpose.</p>
			<p>She feared that in time of trial, when pleasure stood on one side and duty opposed to it on the other, Mabel’s unaided strength would fail in the bitter contest. She feared lest selfishness, worldliness, and pride, would triumph at last over the barriers of christian truth and virtue, which she had sought to rear in the young girl’s heart. And so, since henceforward she could protect her only with her prayers, she gave her for a watchword and a shield that simple precept, so gentle in its workings, yet so mighty in its power,⁠—that potent spell which disarms every spirit of evil, and is woman’s surest weapon, both of warfare and defence,⁠—for she sent her forth to the conflict with the armor of christian love.</p>
			<p>And <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert and Mabel never met again. Not that either was speedily called from a career of earthly usefulness; but their paths henceforth lay apart. Often would Mabel gladly have turned to this well-tried confidant and friend for counsel, sympathy, and advice. But it might not be. Other interests soon became bound up in her own, interests in which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert might not share; and only partially, and at long intervals, could she, even by letter, impart to this friend of her childhood and youth the secret cares and anxieties which burdened her woman’s heart.</p>
			<p>But there was a spiritual bond between them still, a bond which strengthened with time, and was tempered in adversity, for in her last warning charge, her last earnest lesson, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert had imparted to Mabel the great truth that woman needs to learn. It slumbered awhile, then awoke in power; at first as a still, small voice, and anon as a flaming sword, it led her on to victory.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
