<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 33</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>To nurse the sickness, to assuage the care,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To charm the sigh into the happier prayer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forestall the unuttered wish with ready guess;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wise in the exquisite tact of tenderness.</span>
					</p>
					<cite>New Timon.</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>A letter from Mabel to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, written about a year and a half subsequent to her arrival in the West, furnishes, in her own words, the best index to her mode of life, and the successive changes which had, within that period, transpired in the household. It ran as follows:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert:</span>⁠—Your kind New Year’s letter, with all the pleasant reminiscences, affectionate messages, and loving inquiries from yourself and the dear girls, was a most welcome proof of the tender interest with which you have followed me to my new home, and claims a hearty response; though before I have answered half your questions, I fear you will weary of my Western experiences. We have now passed two winters in our new home, and begin to feel ourselves old settlers;⁠—the more so, as no less than thirty families have established themselves in the village since our arrival. As we are a little on the outskirts of the town, however, we have no near neighbor, except <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie, the clergyman, who lives across the opposite bit of prairie, and who, with his daughter, are our most intimate and esteemed friends. I have frequently spoken of Helen in my letters, so her name and many points of her disposition and character are no doubt familiar to you. But you cannot imagine the treasure she has been to me, ever since the first moment of our acquaintance. Next to yourself, there is no one to whom I am so much indebted for the ease and pleasure with which I have been enabled to adapt myself to our new circumstances. Care sits so lightly on her shoulders, and she knows so well how to combine employment and recreation, that in her society the most important duties cease to be burdensome, and little mishaps afford only new occasion for merriment. The children of the rough backwoodsmen, who are among her father’s parishioners, hear the sound of her horse’s feet, and run to meet her the moment she is in sight, sure of some trifling gift, a story, or a ride on the pony, which seems to be common property. If she goes with her basket of medicines to visit the sick, at a distance, she comes back so laden with flowers, you would think she had been a Maying; and an old Canadian Indian woman, to whom she daily reads a chapter in her French Bible, declares her voice more musical than running water. I have never seen father so abstracted with the cares of business that he has not a pleasant word for his fairy nurse, as he calls her, and no bribe is so effectual with the boys, or inducement rather (for I, like you, scorn the use of bribes), as the promise of an evening visit to Helen. As for Harry⁠—but never mind about Harry⁠—sisters are so suspicious, you know, where their brothers are concerned.</p>
				<p>“I wish you could see Harry, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert; you would never recognize in him the youthful dandy who wore such exquisite straw-colored kid gloves, and boasted such a faultless necktie. Not that he has grown slovenly⁠—quite the reverse⁠—but, except under his curls, where his forehead is as white as ever, his complexion is completely embrowned by the sun; his figure has become broad and firmly knit, and he lifts me in his arms as if I was only a feather’s weight; while the lassitude of manner which was always apparent in him, has given place to the quick, earnest movements of a man with determined motives in life and an honorable aim. Then too, he is so happy, and brings such animation into the house whenever he returns home for a day or two, and I am so proud of him! Dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, you must come out here sometime or other, and see what a worthy member of society you have helped, by your influence, to rear. My boys, too, I consider in some degree objects of your training, for they are daily practising the same round of lessons in which, I now thank you most sincerely for having me thoroughly drilled. I am their only teacher, except that Alick studies Greek for an hour every day with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie, and their improvement is regular and encouraging. Murray is backward and rather dull at his books, though a very smart boy at his play. He is a good reader, but has not yet learned to spell correctly; and he experiences all the distaste I once had for the Latin Grammar, which he is just commencing; he has lately made great progress in his Arithmetic, which I attribute entirely to his uncle Harry’s having told him, on his last visit to us, that he must devote himself especially to Mathematics, if he ever wished to become an engineer, a vocation on which he has set his heart. I hope I shall be equally fortunate in suggesting an impulse which shall influence him in other pursuits. With Alick I am obliged to adopt quite another course; the only fear being, that he will injure himself by his devotion to books. He devours all the reading matter which comes in his way, and his greediness for knowledge is insatiable. I am obliged to invent out-of-door employments for him, and entice him into the open air by every possible means, lest his health should suffer from too close application. He is a remarkable child, and the responsibility of his moral and mental training would alarm me, if I were not blessed with the aid of our good <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie, who is as judicious and lovely in his disposition as he is wonderful in his attainments. We do, indeed, enjoy a rare privilege in having such a man for our friend and pastor. His little church is a fountain of good works, and his life, as well as his preaching, is a beautiful illustration of the Christian doctrine. Beside Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, in which he is a proficient, he is an excellent French and German scholar, and is so versed in the natural sciences that he is able to impart a lively interest to all our simple pursuits and pleasures. You will naturally wonder that the talents of this gifted man should be restricted to so narrow a sphere; but it gives added power and beauty to his self-sacrificing labors, that he left a flourishing church at the Eastward, and came hither in a truly missionary spirit. He is the only man in the neighborhood who is my father’s equal in years, and each seems to find pleasure and benefit in the other’s society.</p>
				<p>“Of my housekeeping I have already furnished you, in past letters, with many of the details. I never can be thankful enough for those lessons in domestic economy which I learned under your roof, and which, although uncalled for during one short winter in New York, have been invaluable ever since. I do not believe that people generally realize how much girls acquire from observation, and how much of their future skill in every branch of household matters is due to this sort of unconscious training.</p>
				<p>“Do you remember how perseveringly Em and I used to watch all your operations in the kitchen on baking days, artfully suggesting the propriety of your testing the heat of the oven with a taster, of whose merits, when well baked, we expected to be the judges? I was reminded of it, and had reason to thank you for your patience with us, when, on occasion of my making my first Thanksgiving pies, Helen Gracie came over to assist me, and declared she knew I must be an expert in the business, from the manner in which I held the rolling-pin, buttered the paste, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in all which proceedings I was only the creature of imitation. I still retain Melissa in my service, thanks to the attractions of James, the farmer, who seems very slow to comprehend the partiality with which he is regarded by my handmaiden. James is not what our neighbors would call a forehanded man, and is blind to his own interests in more ways than one. He is at liberty to cultivate as much of my father’s land as he pleases, at the halves, and yet he is so wanting in energy that I can not perceive the slightest extent in the boundaries of his wheat and corn fields, or in the number of his flocks and herds, which can be maintained so easily in this excellent grazing country.</p>
				<p>“You refer to my lack of books, periodicals, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but in this respect I enjoy a rare advantage. Harry resides at only ten miles distance from a beautiful estate, called the Lake Farm, owned by a gentleman of taste and cultivation, with whose venerable mother I have the privilege of claiming a warm friendship. From them I receive regularly everything that is new and valuable in English literature; and have also derived great encouragement in the study of German, which Helen and I are pursuing together, and for which I contrive to reserve a little time every day, in spite of my numerous avocations;⁠—for I have learned the truth of what you used to tell us, dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert, that the more we have to do, the more time we find to do it in.</p>
				<p>“I wish I could close this long letter by giving you favorable accounts of my father’s health, in which you always express so kind an interest. You would think him greatly changed; his hair is snowy white, his figure attenuated and bent, and he suffers from a slight lameness, consequent upon his injuries at the time of the railroad disaster. If, however, he could be persuaded to relinquish the cares and anxieties of business, which I trust may soon be the case, we might still hope to see him enjoy tranquility and length of days; and for this happy termination of his arduous life, I never cease to pray. With the warmest love to Sue, Em, and Charlie, and those of the girls who were my fellow pupils,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Ever truly and affectionately yours,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Mabel Vaughan.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>About this time Mabel received a communication through the post-office, which proved the occasion of much thought, and eventually of decisive action. Upon first perusing it, her countenance expressed a just and generous indignation, and this continued to be the prevailing tone of her feelings during the remainder of the day. The quiet evening hours afforded, however, an opportunity for meditation, and for holding counsel with her father, who assented to her suggestions with his usual air of indifference to all things connected with their present mode of life, and the next morning gave evidence of the conclusion to which she had arrived; for, after carefully inspecting the size and furniture of their best vacant room, taking an inventory, as it were, of its contents, and of the various comforts which that and the house generally afforded, she seated herself at her little table, and committed her thoughts to paper:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Aunt Sabiah:</span>⁠—thus she wrote⁠—I have been wandering about the house for the last half hour, asking myself whether the cottage-roofed chamber above can be made warm in winter, and cool in summer, whether the stairs are not too steep for any but youthful feet to climb, whether our parlor is not too contracted for comfort, and the view from its windows too strange and dreary to ever wear the look of home; and I have concluded, in spite of all disadvantages, that, with love on our side, and the earnest wish to make you happy, you would be far more comfortable here, than in my aunt Ridgway’s spacious and richly-furnished mansion. I never dared say this before. I never ventured to breathe the hope I have long had at heart, for I knew your love of old associations, and your dislike of change. But your last letter has made me bold. I cannot bear the thought that you are subjected to such trials, such hardships, and such absolute indignities, as I plainly perceive you have lately been made to suffer, when here you would be independent, appreciated, and beloved. It is true we have not, as we once had, luxuries to offer, but we have all the necessaries and most of the comforts of life, and these, too, in abundance; for our Western lands are so lavish in their produce, that hospitality with us almost ceases to be a virtue. Then, too, although my father, as you well know, has sacrificed everything but this Western property for the payment of his debts, and is unwilling to dispose of any portion of the estate at present, Harry is gradually bringing a large part of it under cultivation, and, if his success continues, the rent which he insists upon paying, will not only furnish us with every needed supply, but enable us to lay by something for the children’s education. So, even if your poor hands are disabled with the rheumatism, you need not fear that your presence here will be the burden which you say it is to my aunt Margaret. On the contrary, we shall hail your coming with delight, and shall rejoice to contribute in every way to your happiness. I have consulted father, who quite agrees with me in my view of the matter, and will, I am sure, be rejoiced to welcome you. The boys are improving very much as they grow older, and now that they have such an ample play-ground, you will not suffer at all from their noise. Our village shopkeeper goes to the eastward every spring for the purchase of goods, and will be a most excellent escort on the journey. You see I am quite taking it for granted you will come, but it is because I feel so truly, dear aunt, that your rightful and natural place is at our hearth-stone, as well as in our hearts; and because I know you so well that I venture to believe you will not disappoint the earnest wishes and hopes of</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your own dear, loving</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Mabel.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This cordial invitation, as Mabel had justly anticipated, resulted in the arrival of Aunt Sabiah, who, so far from refusing the summons, accepted it with joyful gratitude; and one evening in the month of May, the parlor door was suddenly thrown open, and Murray rushed in, waving a stick in his hand, and exclaiming, “She’s come! I’ve seen her! I saw her old black bonnet just getting out of the stage.”</p>
			<p>“Run, then, and help bring her parcels up to the house,” cried Mabel. “See, Alick has got the start of you already,” and, without waiting for bonnet or shawl, she herself hastened to meet her aunt, who, left by the inexorable stage-driver, according to his custom, at the turn of the road, was looking about her with a bewildered air. A moment more, and Sabiah was toiling up the gentle slope which led to the house, leaning on the arm of her joyfully excited niece, whose circle of loved ones was now complete, while Alick and Murray, whose shout of welcome had been followed by eager offers of assistance, were stumbling along as they best might, laden with the traveller’s smaller articles of baggage.</p>
			<p>“Bless my heart, do see them boys!” cried Sabiah, as Murray rushed past with a band-box on his head (upside down, as an examination of its contents afterwards proved), and Alick might be heard breathing hard, as he followed behind, tugging at a small, old-fashioned trunk. “Now ain’t they grown considerate and strong? La’s me! they don’t look like the same children; and how civil spoken they are, too! And so I’ve got here at last, have I?” continued she, as she entered the family sitting-room, and weary with her long journey, sank into the nearest chair, exhausted, and not a little agitated. “Well, it’s a long road, but it has come to a blessed end;” and after fumbling in vain with a trembling hand at her shawl pin and bonnet strings, she submitted, as she never had submitted in her life before, while Mabel, kneeling on the floor beside her, gently removed her various wrappings, and succeeded in discovering her cap amid the chaos which Murray had created in the band-box.</p>
			<p>Nor was it merely the fatigue of travelling, and the agitation of arrival, which had reduced Sabiah to helplessness and dependence. Two years residence with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ridgway had accomplished what her mother’s injustice and fretfulness, and years of loneliness and neglect had failed to do; and with a spirit and health utterly broken, and a self-reliant will entirely subdued by her sister’s hard and overbearing treatment, the crushed, enfeebled, and prematurely aged woman had thankfully sought the repose and shelter of her brother’s humble home, and Mabel’s unquestioned affection.</p>
			<p>And how welcome were they to the aching heart which, amid the abodes of wealth, had sighed for some quiet, unpretending spot, where, without the oppressive sense of intrusion or restraint, she might spend the remainder of her days in a round of simple usefulness, and in an atmosphere of love. Mabel would scarcely have apologized in her letter for the plain furniture, the clumsy stair-case, the low-roofed rooms, or the solitude of the place, could she have foreseen the sense of peace and security which their very simplicity imparted to her aunt, awakening at once the thought, “Here I can feel at home!” Nor would she for a moment have doubted her own unaided power to make the new inmate happy, could she have realized the ever increasing satisfaction with which the desolate heart would treasure up for days and years her first impulsive outbreak, as she threw her arms around the tottering figure, exclaiming, “Dear aunt, we have got you back at last; we shall never let you go again!”</p>
			<p>“Well, really now, Mabel,” said Sabiah, as she seated herself after tea, at a window, and drawing a huge ball of yarn from her pocket, commenced setting up a stocking, “I don’t see such a great difference, after all, between this country and what I’ve been used to at the East. That ’ere great field, prairie, or whatever you call it, is pretty much like our meadows at home, only it ain’t fenced off; and rivers are rivers anywhere, and always will run down hill, and trees are trees, and sky’s sky, and as to the people, you say they’re most all New England settlers so I don’t see as there’s anything heathenish about the place after all.”</p>
			<p>“Heathenish!” exclaimed Mabel, who had been replacing the tea-cups in the closet, putting the room in order, and arranging everything pleasantly for the evening, but who now came and stood looking over her aunt’s shoulder, “who calls this noble country heathenish?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, your aunt Margaret calls it by that name, and plenty that are worse.”</p>
			<p>“I was going to say I should resent the charge,” said Mabel, laughing; “but I should have so many more serious ones to settle with her first on your account, aunt, that her abuse of the country merely, would come very low on the list; so we must let it pass, I suppose. But these boundless woods, and lakes, and prairies, are well able to defend themselves;⁠—they excite one’s activity and energy, too, by their richness and munificence. I am sure I never look upon them without feeling strengthened for everything that is good, and great, and generous.”</p>
			<p>“La, dear,” said Aunt Sabiah, “you never needed to look out of doors to learn that; you always had it in you. Haven’t you given up everything for other folks? Didn’t Louise impose upon you as long as she lived? And weren’t you the making of Harry? And don’t these healthy, good behaved boys speak for themselves? And I⁠—well, I can’t speak⁠—I can only just thank the Lord inwardly for my share of the blessing, and pray that you may get your reward one of these days⁠—that’s all.”</p>
			<p>“Reward, aunt!” said Mabel, fervently, “I have done little enough, and have wasted many a good opportunity that will never come again,⁠—but what reward can I ask that I have not got already?⁠—my duties all bring their pleasures with them. I am so proud of Harry, and the boys and I love each other so dearly,⁠—and I have got my good auntie back to knit stockings for us all, and⁠—but here comes my father,” and her playful tone changed to one of deep sadness; “I cannot boast that I have kept him well and strong;⁠—poor old gentleman⁠—see how changed he is.”</p>
			<p>“Can that be my brother John? Well, he is altered, I declare,⁠—but it isn’t your fault, child;⁠—he has grown old, to be sure, though,” and Mabel and her aunt watched him with mournful interest, as, alighting from a shabby wagon, he fastened his jaded horse to a post, with the air of one not yet familiarized to the necessity of performing such offices for himself, and then walked feebly in the direction of the house. He seemed really glad to see Sabiah; there was something touching, too, in his reception of her, as if misfortunes had replaced him in the position from which she had never arisen, and so united them more closely in interest and in heart. He felt instinctively that she would not perceive or suffer from the deficiences in his present establishment, and there was something soothing in the sight of her, and in the thought that she would relieve Mabel’s solitude, and perhaps share the labors to which he could not, though he strove to, be blind; and so, whatever her fears might have been in regard to the welcome she should receive from her brother, they were relieved at once by his manner, and Sabiah felt herself fully installed in the household.</p>
			<p>And now succeeded days, months, and even years, of almost uninterrupted calm. Mabel’s life, like most human lives, had presented a period of rapid incident, startling vicissitudes, sudden bereavement, and great and increasing responsibilities. But to her, as to most persons who have experienced such a crisis, there had come a season when the spirits of revolution, disquiet, and change, which are ever rife in the world, seemed for a time to have forsaken <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan’s quiet dwelling, and time in its noiseless and scarcely realized progress, marked no striking or memorable event on the household calendar. Harry still continued at his farm, gradually widening the limits of his rich grain lands, planting young orchards, building store-houses and barns, and reaping the fruits of his manly toil in the high health, cheerful spirits, and sturdy independence, which are the sure rewards of honest and well-directed labor. From this source, too, his father’s family derived their chief means of support; for though <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vaughan had scorned to receive his son’s yearly appropriation in the form of rent, and seemed with strange pertinacity to ignore the wants of his household, he could not shut his eyes to the fact that all the family supplies were forwarded by Harry, nor could he be insensible to the comforts which were purchased with the surplus cash, paid regularly into Mabel’s hands, and by her expended for the common good.</p>
			<p>The old man persisted, however, in considering these mere temporary expedients, and still continued to dream by night and day of the prospective fortune which he and his children were yet to realize, forgetting, in his sad infatuation, that on a swifter and a surer road than that for the success of which he planned and schemed, his only adversary, relentless time, was steadily bearing him downward to the grave.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, Sabiah’s bruised and wounded spirit revived under the soothing influence of affection; her stiff and angular traits, both of thought and action, became softened by Mabel’s persuasive and winning grace, and gently and unconsciously she slid into that household niche for which nature had seemed to destine her. The light and irresponsible, though somewhat monotonous duties which she voluntarily assumed, became her pastime and her pride; the respectful attention with which she was invariably treated laid to rest every suspicion that she might be deemed an intruder; and the confidence with which she was received into family discussions and counsels, made her interests one with those of her young relatives.</p>
			<p>Her dread of strangers seemed as great as ever, for Mabel could not but observe that the first allusion to Helen Gracie, as a neighbor and friend, caused her aunt to start and shrink with seeming annoyance and alarm, exclaiming at the same time, “Who is she? I never heard of her before.” And when Mabel replied, “A dear little friend of ours, daughter of our minister,” Sabiah turned away rather shortly, as if (at least, so Mabel interpreted the movement,) ministers and their daughters were among the inevitable trials of earth. It was surprising, therefore, what a cordial and tender friendship eventually sprang up between the faded spinster and this sweet fragile flower of the prairie. At first Sabiah only watched her with an observant, critical eye; then, after a few interviews, spoke to her with a more than common interest, and Mabel smiled to see how frequently she would lay her hand on the fair girl’s head with a degree of tenderness which she was not wont to manifest. Finally, no one could tell how or why, it became an established custom and a well-confirmed understanding, that the seat next to Aunt Sabiah, whether at the table or the fireside, was sacred to Helen whenever she chose to occupy it; and it was an equally acknowledged fact, that no one, not even Mabel herself, held a more certain place in her shrunken and exclusive heart, than the minister’s lovely and loving child.</p>
			<p>With the minister himself, however, Sabiah never seemed disposed to cultivate any acquaintance. Perhaps his conversation was too elevated to please her taste; for he was such a philosopher, scholar, and naturalist, that he frequently soared into the regions of scholastic lore, and it might be that such “high talk,” as Sabiah used in old times to stigmatize conversation of this class, wearied her; for she never engaged with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gracie in conversation upon any topic, often left the parlor when he was seen approaching, and sometimes, when every one else thought him uncommonly interesting, she would quietly slip out of the room and go to bed.</p>
			<p>These very circumstances, however, were a manifestation of that independence which, in her present simple and unartificial life, Sabiah now enjoyed, and in all things it was easy to perceive that at last the solitary woman had found the sanctuary which her spirit craved, and was an honored, respected member of a happy home.</p>
			<p>And in this home Mabel continued to be as she had been from the beginning⁠—the presiding genius. She walked, talked, studied, and played with the boys, encouraging them by her example, inciting them by her earnestness, cheering them by her mirth, and governing them by her love.</p>
			<p>And if she sometimes felt half impatient with the tedious and self-imposed tasks which their education involved, and sighed with weariness as she bent her head over the difficult translation or intricate problem which she must herself master before she could play the part of instructress to her nephews, she was more than recompensed for the effort when she noticed the respect which they involuntarily paid to her superior knowledge. Nor was the advantage which she thus acquired confined to a single occasion. It served to confirm her general influence, and strengthen her power to guide and direct their minds; for no boy is less susceptible to the loving sway of woman because his intellect, as well as his heart, pays her homage.</p>
			<p>With her own and Harry’s friends at Lake Farm she was in constant correspondence; and though, as yet, there had been no opportunity for an often-projected exchange of visits, she was daily brought into close proximity with their minds and thoughts. Madam Percival seemed ever to have her happiness and improvement at heart. Books, pamphlets, and newspapers were forwarded to her almost weekly, and during a period of more than a year, which was passed by the good lady herself in New York, there was no deficiency in the supply. While thus receiving continual proof of the thoughtfulness of her brother’s friend, she was also, by the selection of authors, the marked passages, and the notes pencilled in a manly hand, brought into familiar intercourse with the vigorous, cultivated, and original intellect, the generous, expansive, and philanthropic heart of Percival. Nor was it by these means only that she learned to set an exalted estimate upon the character of this noble-spirited, enterprising, and truly gifted man. The voice of public opinion, as likewise Harry’s confirming testimony, soon marked him as one destined to do honor to his country and the world. Though his flourishing estate, which he had himself redeemed from the wilderness, was the place dearest to his affections, it was not here alone, or principally, that his duties centred, for he had been trained to the profession of the law; and while all his leisure time was devoted to agricultural pursuits, the large and rapidly increasing city, at some ten miles’ distance, was the scene of his legal labors. Here it was his exalted province, and one which he strove to prove worthy of man’s highest powers,⁠—not to foster differences, but to allay them; not to embitter the heart, but to reconcile human disagreements and rights;⁠—at once seeking to promote peace on earth and good will to men, and redeeming one of the noblest professions from the discredit which has been heaped upon it by false, designing, and self-seeking slaves of sin, unworthy to style themselves servants of the law. Nor holding, as he did, to the highest standard of truth and right, and bringing to the cause the most shining abilities, could his talents long continue obscure, or his name unknown. He was acknowledged far and wide as the man whom the people trusted, and though he had perseveringly declined all public office, his personal influence and sway were widely felt and exercised.</p>
			<p>Had Mabel known no other interest in him than that which one earnest, truth-loving mind cherishes for another of the same scope and order, her enthusiasm would have been readily enkindled by the reports which reached her of his honorable and well-earned fame. As it was, she read his arguments with as intense a zeal as if the cause had been her own; studied his character through the various means which were open to her; sympathized in his principles, and, unconsciously to herself, made him the model by which she strove to mould her nephews to the stature of honest and upright men.</p>
			<p>Thus, dwelling in a neighborhood which presented but few of the refinements of life, associating constantly with boys just ripening into manhood, engaging with them in some of the sterner studies usually confined to their sex, and cultivating an intimate acquaintance with a mind accustomed to grapple with subjects of vital interest to society and the State, it might have been feared that Mabel’s manners would lose something of their delicacy; that the sweet and feminine graces which constitute woman’s highest charm, would give place to bustling activity, or misplaced enthusiasm, and that her tone of thought, if not her mode of expression, would become masculine and harsh.</p>
			<p>But could Mabel have been so utterly false to her truer self, to that divine and saintly spirit, by the aid of which all her victories had hitherto been won, there was an influence ever at work to keep alive the tenderest emotions of her heart, and call into action all those gentle sympathies which soften, chasten, and subdue the soul.</p>
			<p>For there was one shadow ever darkening on the hearthstone, and reflecting itself in the heart and on the countenance of the young girl, who watched over her aged, care-worn, disappointed father, as if she had been the fostering parent and he a feeble child. And, as a mother’s heart grows purer, stronger, holier, amid her anxieties, cares, and fears for her suffering infant, the soul of Mabel became more and more imbued with sweet, womanly tenderness, as she learned a new lesson of sacred love at the altar of filial duty.</p>
			<p>Thus, as time passed on, and every succeeding year ripened and enlarged her mind, and her genial and sunny temper shed light and gladness on her earthly sphere, there was ever one sad and plaintive strain mingling in the harmony of her life, one subject of faith, and hope, and prayer, which kept her heart turned heavenward.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
